Quality Assurance
Documentation and Records: Harmonized GMP Requirements
Patel KT, Chotai NP1
Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd., R and D Center, Bhat, Ghandhinagar - 382 428, 1AR College of Pharmacy
and GH Patel Institute of Pharmacy, Vallabh-Vidhyanagar - 388 120, Gujarat, India
Address for correspondence: Dr. Narendra Chotai; E-mail: pharmacist_chotai2002@yahoo.co.in
ABSTRACT
‘If it’s not written down, then it didn’t happen!’ The basic rules in any good manufacturing practice (GMP) regulations
specify that the pharmaceutical manufacturer must maintain proper documentation and records. Documentation
helps to build up a detailed picture of what a manufacturing function has done in the past and what it is doing
now and, thus, it provides a basis for planning what it is going to do in the future. Regulatory inspectors, during
their inspections of manufacturing sites, often spend much time examining a company’s documents and records.
Effective documentation enhances the visibility of the quality assurance system. In light of above facts, we have
made an attempt to harmonize different GMP requirements and prepare comprehensive GMP requirements
related to ‘documentation and records,’ followed by a meticulous review of the most influential and frequently
referred regulations.
Key words: Documentation and records, good manufacturing practices, quality assurance
INTRODUCTION
Tragic incident
It is a truism that it takes a disaster to happen for people,
and especially regulators, to wake up and review the
accepted way of doing things. So, too, with the issue of
drug safety and drug quality.[1]
The 1972 Devonport, UK, incident resulted in at least five
deaths when drug products designed to be sterile became
Access this article online
Quick Response Code:
Website:
www.jyoungpharm.in
DOI:
10.4103/0975-1483.80303
138 contaminated and recipients developed infections. An
unwritten change to autoclave operation, communicated
orally between operators, resulted in dextrose intravenous
solutions that were not uniformly sterile. The Clothier
inquiry, which examined the causes and contributing
factors, identified several violations of what we now
consider basic good manufacturing practice (GMP).
The chain of events that compromised the safety of the
drug product included inadequate maintenance, inadequate
understanding of autoclave operation, and regular
deviations from the written production instructions (often
as an attempt to compensate for equipment malfunction).
Together, these factors resulted in a sterilization cycle that
did not assure that all vials in the autoclave were sterilized;
thus, some doses were safe, while others led to sepsis in
patients who received them. This incident helped to define
sterility assurance in an operational way. Processes and
requirements for equipment validation were created, and
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
legal right of inspection was explicitly given to the agency.
Validation was developed as a means of documenting
systematic evaluation of the sterilization cycle — building
in a safety factor — and identifying the critical parameters
that need to be controlled to assure process performance.
The concept that quality must be designed into the process
and cannot be achieved only by testing remains a central
tenet of current good manufacturing practice (cGMP).
In other words, how you make something helps to define
its level of quality. Preventing errors is more effective
than finding rejects because it is not possible to detect all
rejects.[2] The current requirement for ‘documented
evidence’ may be driven by this event of Devenport.
GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES
GMP is that part of quality assurance which ensures that
products are consistently produced and controlled to the
quality standards appropriate to their intended use. GMP
is aimed primarily at diminishing the risk inherent in any
pharmaceutical production. Such risks are essentially of two
types: cross-contamination (in particular, with unexpected
contaminants) and mix-ups (for example, false labeling).[3]
Worldwide, there are different official regulatory statements
and guidelines, both national and international, for GMP
for pharmaceutical (or ‘drug’ or ‘medicinal’) products.
They may be regulations (as in the US, Japan, or Korea),
directives (as in the EU), guides (as in the UK), codes (as
in Australia), or a WHO code (as in many Southeast Asia
Countries). Among them, the following stand out as the
most influential and most frequently referenced:
•
The US Current Good Manufacturing Practices
for Finished Pharmaceuticals regulations (the US
cGMPs).[4]
•
The Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice for
Medicinal Products of the European Union (the EC
GMP Guide).[5]
•
The ICH Q7 Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients.[6]
•
The World Health Organization (WHO) good
manufacturing practices.[7]
The other guidelines and regulations referred by the
pharmaceutical manufacturers are as under:
•
Schedule M ‘Good Manufacturing Practices and
Requirements of Premises, Plant and Equipment for
Pharmaceutical Products,’ The Drugs and Cosmetics
Act and Rules, India.[8]
•
PIC/S Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice for
Medicinal Products.[9]
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2 •
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER):
Manufacturing, Processing, or Holding Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredients.[10]
DOCUMENTATION
Documentation is the key to GMP compliance and ensures
traceability of all development, manufacturing, and testing
activities. Documentation provides the route for auditors to
assess the overall quality of operations within a company
and the final product.
The 10 golden rules of GMP[11]
Table 1 describes the 10 golden rules of GMP. Rule No.
3 and 5 describe the importance of documentation and
records.
Basics[12]
•
The management of each operational site is required
to define responsibility for origination, distribution,
maintenance, change control, and archiving of all GMP
documentation and records within that department or
unit.
•
Document owners are required to ensure that all aspects
of documentation and records management specified
in form of standard operating procedures (SOPs).
•
All associates have the responsibility of ensuring that all
GMP activities are performed according to the official
SOPs; any deviations in procedure are reported to their
supervisor and are adequately documented.
•
The local quality assurance unit has the responsibility
of ensuring via organizational measures and auditing
that GMP documentation and records systems used
within the operational unit are complete and comply
with the relevant GMP requirements, and also that the
requirements of the SOPs are followed.
•
Requirements for specific documents or record,
including ownership, content, authorization, and change
Table 1: The 10 golden rules of GMP
Number The golden rule
1 Get the facility design right from the start
2 Validate processes
3 Write good procedures and follow them
4 Identify who does what
5 Keep good records
6 Train and develop staff
7 Practice good hygiene
8 Maintain facilities and equipment
9 Build quality into the whole product lifecycle
10 Perform regular audits
139
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
control procedures, has to be described or cross-
referenced in the quality modules which relate to the
subject of the document.
General requirements[13]
•
Good documentation constitutes an essential part of
the quality assurance system. Clearly written procedures
prevent errors resulting from spoken communication,
and clear documentation permits tracing of activities
performed.
•
Documents must be designed, prepared, reviewed, and
distributed with care.
•
Documents must be approved, signed, and dated by
the appropriate competent and authorized persons.
•
Documents must have unambiguous contents. The title,
nature, and purpose should be clearly stated. They must
be laid out in an orderly fashion and be easy to check.
Reproduced documents must be clear and legible.
•
Documents must be regularly reviewed and kept up-to-
date. When a document has been revised, systems must
be operated to prevent inadvertent use of superseded
documents (e.g., only current documentation should be
available for use).
•
Documents must not be handwritten; however, where
documents require the entry of data, these entries may
be made in clear legible handwriting using a suitable
indelible medium (i.e., not a pencil). Sufficient space
must be provided for such entries.
•
Any correction made to a document or record must
be signed or initialed and dated; the correction must
permit the reading of the original information. Where
appropriate, the reason for the correction must be
recorded.
•
Record must be kept at the time each action is taken and
in such a way that all activities concerning the conduct
of preclinical studies, clinical trials, and the manufacture
and control of products are traceable.
•
Storage of critical records must at secure place, with
access limited to authorized persons. The storage
location must ensure adequate protection from loss,
destruction, or falsification, and from damage due to
fire, water, etc.
•
Records which are critical to regulatory compliance or to
support essential business activities must be duplicated
on paper, microfilm, or electronically, and stored in a
separate, secure location in a separate building from the
originals.
•
Date may be recorded by electromagnetic or
photographic means, but detailed procedures relating
to whatever system is adopted must be available.
Accuracy of the record should be checked as per the
defined procedure. If documentation is handled by
140 •
•
electronic data processing methods, only authorized
persons should be able to enter or modify data in the
computer, access must be restricted by passwords
or other means, and entry of critical data must be
independently checked.
It is particularly important that during the period of
retention, the data can be rendered legible within an
appropriate period of time.
If data is modified, it must be traceable.
There are various types of procedures that a GMP facility
can follow. Given below is a list of the most common types
of documents, along with a brief description of each.
1. Quality manual: A global company document that
describes, in paragraph form, the regulations and/or
parts of the regulations that the company is required
to follow.
2. Policies: Documents that describe in general terms, and
not with step-by-step instructions, how specific GMP
aspects (such as security, documentation, health, and
responsibilities) will be implemented.
3. Standard operating procedures (SOPs): Step-by-step
instructions for performing operational tasks or
activities.
4. Batch records: These documents are typically used
and completed by the manufacturing department.
Batch records provide step-by-step instructions for
production-related tasks and activities, besides including
areas on the batch record itself for documenting such
tasks.
5. Test methods: These documents are typically used and
completed by the quality control (QC) department.
Test methods provide step-by-step instructions
for testing supplies, materials, products, and
other production-related tasks and activities, e.g.,
environmental monitoring of the GMP facility.
Test methods typically contain forms that have to
be filled in at the end of the procedure; this is for
documenting the testing and the results of the testing.
6. Specifications: Documents that list the requirements
that a supply, material, or product must meet before
being released for use or sale. The QC department will
compare their test results to specifications to determine
if they pass the test.
7. Logbooks: Bound collection of forms used to document
activities. Typically, logbooks are used for documenting
the operation, maintenance, and calibration of a piece
of equipment. Logbooks are also used to record critical
activities, e.g., monitoring of clean rooms, solution
preparation, recording of deviation, change controls
and its corrective action assignment.
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
Hierarchical document system[12]
•
The organization should establish a hierarchical
document system as mentioned in Figure 1:
•
The regulations that a company is responsible for
following (e.g., USFDA/EU GMP/ICH/Schedule M,
etc.) should be at the top of the document pyramid and
should govern the directives of the sublevels.
•
The level immediately beneath the regulations, level 1
documents (e.g., the Quality Manual), should break the
regulations into parts specific to those that the company
is required to follow. These documents should establish
overall principles and guidelines for how the company
plans on developing, documenting, and implementing a
cCMP-compliant quality system. Top-level documents
apply to all departments within a cGMP-compliant
company and are not specific in nature.
•
The next level, level 2, of documents in the hierarchical
document pyramid should further break down the parts
of the regulations into specific subjects or topics. These
documents (e.g., Company Polices) should establish
guidelines with which all subordinate level procedures
must comply to ensure consistency across departments.
•
Level 2 documents should not provide specific directive
instructions or forms for documenting data but rather
provide the overall intentions and guidelines governing
critical programs or systems as well as explanation for
the rationale and program designs. These documents
will apply to all departments within a GMP-compliant
company.
•
SOPs should be the next level in the document
hierarchy after company policy documents. These
types of documents should provide specific step-
by-step instructions for performing the operational
tasks or activities that were talked about in the
previous levels (for example: SOP titled ‘Writing,
Revising, Numbering, and Distributing Controlled
•
Documents’). Level 3 documents (i.e., SOPs)
should be department specific or function specific.
The last level of documents in a document hierarchical
structure are level 4 documents. These documents
are the most specific in nature, (e.g., batch record,
test methods, validation procedures). They apply to a
specific department, product, equipment, or process.
Level 4 documents provide step-by-step instructions
for production-related tasks and activities as well as
provide a means for documenting such tasks using,
for example, data sheets, forms, or batch records.
The details outlined in these documents may override
directions given in other level documents. (For example:
the company’s documentation SOP may state that
numbers be rounded off to three significant figures;
the batch record, on the other hand, may state that
all numbers be expressed in scientific notation. Thus,
instructions in level 4 documents, which are specific
to a particular process, can overrule the instruction
mentioned in level 3 documents, which are general in
nature. The document hierarchy pyramid is one way of
organizing a company’s documents.
More/less levels may be added/subtracted to meet the
company’s specific needs.
HARMONIZED REQUIREMENT
The harmonized requirements were prepared after
taking into consideration the above mentioned guidance
documents/regulatory requirements.[4–10]
Site master file
The manufacturer should prepare a succinct document
in the form of a ‘Site Master File,’ containing specific
and factual GMP about the production and/or control
of pharmaceutical manufacturing procedures carried out
at the premises. It should contain the descriptions of the
following:
General information:
•
Brief information on the firm
•
Pharmaceutical manufacturing activities, as permitted
by the licensing authority
•
Other manufacturing activities, if any, carried out on
the premises
•
Type of products licensed for manufacture, with
flowcharts detailing procedure and process flow
•
Number of employees engaged in the production,
quality control, storage and distribution
•
Use of outside scientific, analytical, or other technical
assistance in relation to manufacture and analysis
Figure 1: Hierarchical document system
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2 141
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
•
•
Short description of the quality management system
of the firm
Products details registered with foreign countries
Personnel:
•
Organizational chart showing the arrangements for
quality assurance, including production and quality
control
•
Qualification, experience, and responsibilities of key
personnel
Premises:
•
Simple plan or description of manufacturing areas
drawn to scale
•
Nature of construction and fixtures/fittings
•
Brief description of ventilation systems. More details
should be given for critical areas with potential risk of
airborne contamination (schematic drawing of systems).
Classification of the rooms used for the manufacture
of sterile products should be mentioned.
•
Special areas for the handling of highly toxic, hazardous,
and sensitizing materials.
•
Brief description of the water system (schematic
drawings of systems), including sanitation.
•
Description of planned preventive maintenance
programs for premises and of the recording system.
Equipment:
•
Brief description of major equipment used in
production and in the quality control laboratories (a
list of equipment required)
•
Description of planned preventive maintenance
programs for equipment and of the recording system
•
Qualification and calibration, including the recording
systems, and arrangements for computerized systems
validation
Sanitation:
•
Written specifications and procedures for cleaning
manufacturing areas and equipment
Documentation:
•
Arrangements for the preparation, revision, and
distribution of documents
•
Necessary documentation for the manufacture
•
Any other documentation related to product quality
that is not mentioned elsewhere (e.g., regarding
microbiological control of air and water)
Production:
•
Brief description of production operations using,
wherever possible, flow sheets and charts specifying
142 •
•
•
important parameters
Arrangements for the handling of starting materials,
packaging materials, and bulk and finished products;
this includes the arrangements for sampling, quarantine,
release, and storage.
Arrangements for the handling of rejected materials
and products.
Brief description of the general policy for process
validation.
Quality control:
•
Description of the quality control system and of the
activities of the quality control department. Procedures
for the release of the finished products.
Loan license manufacture and licensee:
•
Description of the way in which compliance with GMP
by the loan licensee should be assessed.
Distribution, complaints, and product recall:
•
Arrangements and recording system for distribution
•
Arrangements for the handling of complaints and
product recalls
Self inspection:
•
Short description of the self-inspection system,
indicating whether an independent and experienced
external expert is to be involved in evaluating the
manufacturer’s compliance with GMP in all aspects of
production
Export of drugs
•
Products exported to different countries
•
Complaints and product recall, if any
Documentation system and specifications
Documentation is an essential part of the quality assurance
system and, as such, should be related to all aspects of
GMP. Its aim is to define the specifications for all materials
and the method of manufacture and control, to ensure
that all personnel concerned with manufacture have the
information necessary to decide whether or not to release
a batch of a drug for sale, and to provide an audit trail that
will permit investigation of the history of any suspected
defective batch. The specifications should describe in detail
the requirements with which the products or materials used
or obtained during manufacture have to conform. They
serve as a basis for quality evaluation.
Manufacturing formulae and processing and packaging
instructions should specify all the starting materials used
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
and describe all processing and packaging operations.
Procedures should give directions for performing certain
operations, e.g., cleaning, clothing, environmental control,
sampling, testing, and equipment operation. Records should
provide a history of each batch of product, including its
distribution, and also of all other relevant circumstances
pertinent to the quality of the final product.
Written records should be maintained so that data can be
used for evaluating, at least annually, the quality standards
of each drug product to determine the need for changes
in drug product specifications or manufacturing or control
procedures. Written procedures should be established and
followed for such evaluations and must include provisions
for:
•
•
A review of a representative number of batches,
whether approved or rejected and, where applicable,
the records associated with the batch.
A review of complaints, recalls, and returned or salvaged
drug products, and of the investigations conducted.
All documents related to the manufacture of intermediates,
active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), and finished
products should be prepared, reviewed, approved,
and distributed according to written procedures. Such
documents can be paper-based or in electronic form.
Documents should be approved, signed, and dated by the
appropriate responsible persons. No document should be
changed without authorization and approval.
Each specification for raw materials, intermediates, final
products, and packing materials should be approved and
maintained by the quality control department. Periodic
revisions of the specifications must be carried out
whenever changes are necessary.
The issuance, revision, superseding, and withdrawal of
all documents should be controlled, with maintenance
of revision histories. When a document has been revised,
systems should be operated to prevent inadvertent use of
superseded documents. Superseded documents should be
retained for a specific period of time.
Periodic revisions of the specifications may be necessary to
comply with new editions of the national pharmacopoeia
or other official compendia.
Documents should have unambiguous contents: the
title, nature, and purpose should be clearly stated. They
should be laid out in an orderly fashion and be easy to
check. Reproduced documents should be clear and legible.
The process of reproduction of working documents
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2 from master documents must not allow any error to be
introduced through the reproduction process.
A procedure should be established for retaining all
appropriate documents (e.g., development history reports,
scale-up reports, technical transfer reports, process
validation reports, training records, production records,
control records, and distribution records). The retention
periods for these documents should be specified.
All production, control, and distribution records should be
retained for at least 1 year after the expiry date of the batch.
For APIs with retest dates, records should be retained for
at least 3 years after the batch is completely distributed.
Documents should not be handwritten; however, where
documents require the entry of data, these entries may
be made in clear, legible, indelible handwriting. Sufficient
space should be provided for such entries. Any alteration
made to the entry on a document should be signed and
dated; the alteration should permit the reading of the
original information. Where appropriate, the reason for
the alteration should be recorded.
During the retention period, originals or copies of records
should be readily available at the establishment where the
activities described in such records occurred. Records
that can be promptly retrieved from another location by
electronic or other means are acceptable.
Data may be recorded by electronic data processing systems
or photographic or other reliable means, but detailed
procedures relating to the system in use should be available
and the accuracy of the records should be checked. If
documentation is handled by electronic data processing
methods, only authorized persons should be able to enter or
modify data in the computer, and there should be a record
of changes and deletions. Access should be restricted by
passwords or other means and the result of entry of critical
data should be independently checked. Batch records that are
electronically stored should be protected by back-up transfer
onto magnetic tape, microfilm, paper, or other means.
Specifications should be established and documented for
raw materials, intermediates (where necessary), and API/
formulations, as well as for labeling and packaging materials.
In addition, specifications may be appropriate for certain
other materials, such as process aids, gaskets, or other
materials used during the production of intermediates or
API/formulations that could critically impact on quality.
Acceptance criteria should be established and documented
for in-process controls.
143
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
If electronic signatures are used on documents, they should
be authenticated and secure.
Equipment cleaning and use record
Records of major equipment use, cleaning, sanitization
and/or sterilization, and maintenance should show the
date, time (if appropriate), product, and batch number of
each batch processed in the equipment and the name and
signature of the person who has performed the cleaning
and maintenance. The persons performing and double-
checking the cleaning and maintenance should date and sign
or initial the log, indicating that the work was performed.
Entries in the log should be in chronological order.
Cross-contamination should be avoided by appropriate
technical or organizational measures, for example:
•
Production in segregated areas (required for products
such as the penicillins, live vaccines, live bacterial
preparations, and some other biologicals), or by
campaign (separation in time) followed by appropriate
cleaning
•
Providing appropriate air-locks and air extraction
•
Minimizing the risk of contamination caused by
recirculation or re-entry of untreated or insufficiently
treated air
•
Keeping protective clothing inside areas where products
with special risk of cross-contamination are processed
•
Using cleaning and decontamination procedures
of known effectiveness, as ineffective cleaning of
equipment is a common source of cross-contamination
•
Using ‘closed systems’ of production
•
Testing for residues and use of cleaning status labels
on equipment
If equipment is dedicated to manufacturing one intermediate
or API, then individual equipment records of different
activities like cleaning, maintenance, batch log, etc., are
not necessary, provided the batch record has complete
traceability of this information. In case of formulation
manufacturing, the appropriate cleaning procedure should
be established to ensure removal of any residue of the
previous product.
Records of raw materials, intermediates, labeling, and
packaging materials
Records should be maintained, including:
•
The name of the manufacturer; identity and quantity
of each shipment of each batch of raw materials,
intermediates, or labeling and packaging materials; the
name of the supplier; the supplier’s control number(s)
144 •
•
•
•
(if known) or other identification number; the number
allocated on receipt; and the date of receipt;
The results of any test or examination performed and
the conclusions derived from this;
Records tracing the use of materials;
Documentation of the examination and review of
labeling and packaging materials for conformity with
established specifications;
The final decision regarding rejected raw materials,
intermediates, or labeling and packaging materials.
Starting materials in the storage area should be appropriately
labeled. Labels should bear at least the following
information:
•
The designated name of the product and the internal
code reference, where applicable
•
The batch number given by the supplier and, on
receipt, the control or batch number (if any) given by
the manufacturer; these must be documented so as to
ensure traceability
•
The status of the contents (e.g., on quarantine, on test,
released, rejected, returned, recalled, etc.)
•
Where appropriate, an expiry date or a date beyond
which retesting is necessary
Master (approved) labels should be maintained for
comparison with issued labels.
Master production instructions/master production
and control records (MPCR)/master formula card
(MFC)
To ensure uniformity from batch to batch, master
production instructions for each intermediate or API/
finished product should be prepared, dated, and signed by
one person and independently checked, dated, and signed
by a second person in the quality unit(s).
Competent persons experienced in production and
quality control should be responsible for the content and
distribution within the firm of instructions and master
formulae. These should be duly signed and dated.
Outdated master formulae should be withdrawn but
retained for reference. Copies of the master formula should
be prepared in a manner that will eliminate any possibility
of transcription error.
In certain circumstances, for example, in the first
production runs following pilot development, the master
formula might need to be amended. Any amendments must
be formally authorized and signed by competent person(s).
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
The amended document should be replaced at the earliest
opportunity by a newly prepared master formula.
Processing should be carried out in accordance with the
master formula. Master production instructions should
include:
•
The name of the intermediate/API/formulation being
manufactured and an identifying document reference
code, if applicable
•
A complete list of raw materials and intermediates
(designated by names or codes sufficiently specific to
identify any special quality characteristics)
•
An accurate statement of the quantity or ratio of each
raw material or intermediate to be used, including the
unit of measure. Where the quantity is not fixed, the
calculation for each batch size or rate of production
should be included. Variations to quantities should be
included wherever justified
•
The production location and major production
equipment to be used
•
Detailed production instructions, including the:
□ Sequences to be followed
□ Ranges of process parameters to be used
□ The methods, or reference to the methods, to be
used for preparing the critical equipment (e.g.,
cleaning, assembling)
□ Sampling instructions and in-process controls, with
their acceptance criteria, where appropriate
□ Time limits for completion of individual processing
steps and/or the total process, where appropriate
□ Expected yield ranges at appropriate phases of
processing or time.
•
Where appropriate, special notations and precautions
to be followed, or cross-references to these
•
Instructions for storage of the intermediate or API/
semi-finished formulations to assure its suitability for
use; instructions should cover the labeling (specimen
labels and packaging materials and special storage
conditions with time limits, where appropriate).
Batch production records/batch production and
control records (BPCR)/batch manufacturing record
(BMR)
Batch production records should be prepared for each
intermediate and API/formulation and should include
complete information relating to the production and
control of each batch. The batch production record
should be checked before issuance to assure that it is the
correct version and a legible accurate reproduction of the
appropriate master production instruction. If the batch
production record is produced from a separate part of
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2 the master document, that document should include a
reference to the current master production instruction
being used.
Before any processing begins, a check should be performed
and recorded to ensure that the equipment and workstation
are clear of previous products, documents, or materials not
required for the planned process and that the equipment
is clean and suitable for use.
These records should be numbered with a unique batch or
identification number and dated and signed when issued.
In continuous production, the product code together with
the date and time can serve as the unique identifier until
the final number is allocated.
The batch number should be immediately recorded in
a logbook or by electronic data processing system. The
record should include date of allocation, product identity,
and size of batch.
Documentation of completion of each significant step in
the batch production records (batch production and control
records) should include:
•
Dates and, when appropriate, times
•
Identity of major equipment used (e.g., reactors, driers,
mills, etc.)
•
Specific identification of each batch, including weights,
measures, and batch numbers of raw materials,
intermediates, or any reprocessed materials used during
manufacturing
•
Actual results recorded for critical process parameters
•
Any sampling performed
•
Signatures of the persons performing and directly
supervising or checking each critical step in the
operation
•
In-process and laboratory test results
•
Actual yield at appropriate phases or times
•
Description of packaging and label
•
Representative label (commercial supply)
•
Any deviation noted, its evaluation, and investigation
conducted (if appropriate) or reference to that
investigation (if stored separately)
•
Results of release testing
•
All analytical records relating to the batch, or a reference
that will permit their retrieval
•
A decision for the release or rejection of the batch,
with the date and signature of the person responsible
for the decision
•
The production record review
Production and quality control records should be reviewed
as part of the approval process of batch release. Any
145
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
divergence or failure of a batch to meet its specifications
should be thoroughly investigated. The investigation
should, if necessary, extend to other batches of the same
product and other products that may have been associated
with the specific failure or discrepancy. A written record
of the investigation should be made and should include
the conclusion and follow-up action.
The following information should be recorded at the time
each action is taken (the date must be noted and the person
responsible should be clearly identified by signature or
electronic password):
•
The name of the product, the batch number and the
quantity of product to be packed, as well as the quantity
actually obtained and its reconciliation
•
The date(s) and time(s) of the packaging operations
•
The name of the responsible person carrying out the
packaging operation
•
The initials of the operators of the different significant
steps
•
The checks made for identity and conformity with
the packaging instructions, including the results of in-
process controls
•
Details of the packaging operations carried out,
including references to equipment and the packaging
lines used and, when necessary, instructions for
keeping the product unpacked or a record of returning
product that has not been packaged to the storage area
•
Whenever possible, the regular check for correctness
of printing (e.g. batch number, expiry date and other
additional overprinting) and specimen samples collected
•
Notes on any special problems, including details of any
deviation from the packaging instructions, with written
authorization by an appropriate person
•
The quantities and reference number or identification
of all printed packaging materials and bulk product
issued, used, destroyed, or returned to stock and the
quantities of product obtained; this is necessary to
permit an adequate reconciliation.
Laboratory control records
Laboratory control records should include complete data
derived from all tests conducted to ensure compliance
with established specifications and standards, including
examinations and assays, as follows:
•
A description of samples received for testing, including
the material name or source, batch number and,
where appropriate, the manufacturer and/or supplier;
alternatively, other distinctive code, date of sample
taken and, where appropriate, the quantity of the sample
and date the sample was received for testing
•
A statement of, or reference to, each test method used
146 •
•
•
•
•
•
A statement of the weight or measure of sample used
for each test as described by the method; data on,
or cross-reference to, the preparation and testing of
reference standards, reagents, and standard solutions
A complete record of all raw data generated during
each test, in addition to graphs, charts, and spectra from
laboratory instrumentation, all properly identified to
show the specific material and the batch tested
A record of all calculations performed in connection
with the test including, for example, units of measure,
conversion factors, and equivalency factors
A statement of the test results and how they compare
with established acceptance criteria
The signature of the person who performed each test
and the date(s) on which the tests were performed
The date and signature of a second person, showing
that the original records were reviewed for accuracy,
completeness, and compliance with established standards.
Complete records should also be maintained for:
•
Any modifications to an established analytical method
•
Periodic calibration of laboratory instruments,
apparatus, gauges, and recording devices
•
All stability testing performed on APIs/formulations
•
Out-of-specification (OOS) investigations
Complete records should be maintained of any testing and
standardization of laboratory reference standards, reagents,
and standard solutions; record should also be maintained of
periodic calibration of laboratory instruments, apparatus,
gauges, and recording devices.
Batch production record review
Written procedures should be established and followed
for the review and approval of batch production and
laboratory control records, including packaging and
labeling, to determine compliance of the intermediate
or API with established specifications before a batch is
released or distributed.
Batch production and laboratory control records of critical
process steps should be reviewed and approved by the
quality unit(s) before an API batch is released or distributed.
Production and laboratory control records of non-critical
process steps can be reviewed by qualified production
personnel or other units, following procedures approved
by the quality unit(s).
All deviation, investigation, and OOS reports should be
reviewed as part of the batch record review before the
batch is released.
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
The quality unit(s) can delegate to the production unit the
responsibility and authority for release of intermediates,
except for those shipped outside the control of the
manufacturing company.
Distribution record should be maintained and must include
the batch number; quantity produced; name, address, and
contact details of customer; quantity supplied; and date
of supply.
POLICY FOR IMPLEMENTATION
The following approach pertaining to ‘documentation and
records’ may be helpful for pharmaceutical manufacturers
to meet the expectations of different regulatory agencies.
Write good procedures and follow them[11]
Think about what happens in a workplace if written
procedures are not available. People rely on more senior
employees to tell them how to do things and then do their
job from memory. This is fine for a company making
garden pots, but not so good when the products being
made are pharmaceuticals and can even cause death!
In the food, drug, and medical device industry it is critical
that good procedures are in place to ensure a controlled
and consistent performance; it is an essential part of GMP.
Procedures should be clear, concise, and logical. Consider
hiring a professional technical writer to do the job. Unlike
permanent employees, they know how write well and will
perform usability tests to ensure that the documents work.
Review of procedure by an independent party can also help
to improve process.
Outline the task before you begin writing the procedure.
Create a brief breakdown of the important steps and
key points related to the task; a flowchart is a useful tool.
Remember that people do not usually read procedures
from start to finish; they tend to scan the document for
key words. To make information easier to digest and follow,
break the procedure into chunks and use the following:
•
Headings
•
Tables
•
Bullet points
•
Diagrams
When writing out any procedure, one should try and
visualize the person who will be following that procedure.
Use language that that person can understand. Do not
include too much or too little information. Increase the
readability of the instructions by using simple sentences
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2 and by writing in a conversational style. Most companies
have a 3-year review cycle for their documents; however,
this can be set according to the likelihood of change in the
process that the document relates to.
Following procedures[11]
It is all very well to have great written procedures in place
but to ensure a controlled and consistent performance they
need to be followed; it is a GMP requirement. Frequently,
the steps described in a written procedure may not appear
to be the most efficient way of working. Taking shortcuts
may save time or make the task easier, but one should never
deviate from a written procedure without the approval of
a supervisor or the quality department.
There are two main reasons for this:
•
Many shortcuts may create pitfalls that can be costly in
the end.
•
Each step in a procedure has been included for a
purpose.
Even though the rationale of a particular step may not
be immediately apparent, it may have been put there
as a check for another stage of the process. Ideas for
improvement should always be encouraged, but do not
change procedures without assessing the impact on the
entire process.
Keep good records[11]
Good records enable one to track all activities performed
during batch manufacture, from the receipt of raw materials
to the final product release; they provide a history of the
batch and its distribution. It is an essential part of GMP
to keep accurate records, and during an audit it helps
convey the message that procedures are being followed.
It also demonstrates that the processes are known and are
under control.
Remember!!!
•
Record all necessary information immediately upon
completion of a task
•
Never trust your memory or write results on loose
pieces of paper
•
Write your name legibly in ink. Remember that by
signing records you are certifying that the record is
correct and that you have performed the task as per
the defined procedure.
•
Draw a single line through any mistakes, and initial and
date the correction. Include a reason for the correction
at the bottom of the page.
147
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
•
•
•
Record details if you deviate from a procedure. Ask
your supervisor or the quality department for advice
if a deviation should occur.
Do not document someone else’s work unless you are
designated and trained to do so.
Never assume that undocumented work has been
properly completed – if it’s not written down, then it
didn’t happen!
Documents/SOPs required
The following documents and procedures should be
prepared to fulfill the above mentioned requirements.
The data generated through these procedures should be
maintained to show compliance with the above mentioned
requirements.
•
Prepare apex documents like Quality Policy, Quality
Manual, Site Master File, Validation Master Plan, etc. to
describe the quality commitments of the management
•
Define the roles and responsibilities of all personnel
working in the organization
•
Prepare policy for periodic review of documents.
Ensure that the current industrial practices and
pharmacopoeial requirements are fulfilled by the current
versions of documents
•
SOP for document (SOPs, MPCR, BPCR, validation/
qualification protocols, formats) preparation, review,
approval, training, distribution, control, and its retention
•
Procedure for maintaining revision history
•
Management, control, and retention of superseded or
obsolete documents
•
Document archival and retrieval procedure
•
Handling, archival, retrieval, and retention of electronic
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
records/documents
Procedure for control of electronic signatures
Equipment cleaning and sanitation procedure
Issuance and control of equipment logs
Document describing measures taken for avoidance of
cross-contamination and its training records
Cleaning validation master plan
Procedure for batch-to-batch and product-to-product
cleaning and its verification to ensure removal of residue
of previous batch/product
Records for incoming raw materials and packaging
materials
SOP for preparation of process validation protocol and
reports
SOP for preparation of master production control
records
SOP for preparation of batch manufacturing and
control records
SOP for allocation of batch number
Calibration master plan and calibration reports
Batch release procedure
SOP for preparation and control of QC data sheet
SOP for allocation of analytical control number
Procedure for review of analytical data
SOP for investigation of OOS results
SOP for change control, revision of any process or
documents, or upgradation of facility or equipment
should be routed through impact assessment and
change control procedure
SOP for deviation handling system
SOP for corrective and preventive action (CAPA)
SOP for stability testing
SOP for product distribution and its control
CHECKLIST FOR COMPLIANCE ASSESSMENT
The following checkpoints/checklist may help to assess the compliance of ‘documentation and records’ with GMP
requirements
Checklist/checkpoints Document to refer Y/N/NA Remarks
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Is there an SOP for writing, handling, and updating SOPs? Are all documents passing through appropriate review and approval procedure? Distribution records maintained for all documents? Is there any procedure for ensuring that the current version of the documents are
being used?
Is responsibility assigned for issuance and control of documents? Is history of changes made in documents maintained? Does document control procedure include the procedure for handling obsolete
versions?
Does the storage/archival of documents provide a suitable environment to minimize
deterioration or damage to quality-related documents?
Is there a system for periodic review of documents? Is there a document control system available? SOP for SOP
Template of all document
Traceability of any specification/SOP
Document distribution and retrieval
record
Job description
Document history record
Traceability of compliance
Archive
Document review/revision SOP
Respective SOP
148 Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
Checklist/checkpoints Document to refer Y/N/NA Remarks
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Are all quality-related documents being retained for history? Are corrections made in documents signed and explained? Does the SOP reflect
this policy?
Are electronic signatures used? If yes, is there an adequate control or security
measure?
Is equipment cleaning being recorded in the logbook? Is preventive maintenance activity being recorded in the logbook? Or is there any
other appropriate documentation?
Is RM available at the warehouse, labeled with the following details:
-
Lot No.
-
Receipt date
-
Approval/status label
Are master labels retained?
(For all lots that are packed and supplied, master labels should be part of Batch
Packaging Record (BPR) or be separately filed)
Does the MPCR/MFC mention the following details?
-
Name of material, with code
-
Quantity
-
Rationale
-
Equipment to be used
-
Process parameter
-
In-process checks
-
Sampling instruction
-
Expected yield
Have process parameters critical to quality been defined and, if parameters are
exceeded, is the affect on quality known?
Is there a system for identifying major equipment, instruments, and production
lines? Is this information included in batch production and control records where
appropriate?
Is there a system to determine customer requirements related to the product and
supply of the product?
Is there a formal procedure to communicate the agreed upon customer requirements
to the appropriate personnel?
Is there a procedure in place to assure that the manufacturer and the customer have
mutually agreed upon the specifications and other requirements? If not, what is the
alternative process?
Is there a system to assure that any mutually agreed customer-initiated changes are
promptly incorporated?
Is there an adequate system in place to assure that significant process changes,
including the use of subcontractors and their effect on the product, are
communicated to the customer?
Does the batch record mention the following:
-
Deviations, if any
-
In-process results
-
Release statement
-
All details should match with MPCR
Are specifications for all material available with QC and user department? Is method of analysis available with QC? Is there an SOP for investigation of OOS? Does the analytical report/COA mention the reference of STP used? Is analysis being performed by qualified personnel? Are batch record and analytical records being reviewed by QA before dispatch? Superseded/obsolete document
SOP for correction of entries
SOP
Logbook
Preventive maintenance plan and
logbook
In RM store
BPR / BPCR
MPCR/MFC
MPCR and development report
MPCR and BPCR
Policy and evident document
SOP and evident document
Agreement
Agreement
Agreement
BPCR
Traceability at QC
Traceability at QC
SOP and evident document
Analytical report
Analyst and its qualification and
copy of FDA approval
SOP on batch release
GMP: Good manufacturing practice, cGMP: Current good manufacturing practice, SOP: Standard operating procedures, QC: Quality control, MFC: Master formula card,
MPCR: Master production and control records, BMR: Batch manufacturing record, BPR: Batch packaging record, BPCR: Batch production and control records, API: Active
pharmaceutical ingredients, OOS: Out-of-specification, RM: Raw material, COA: Certificate of analysis, STP: Standard test procedure, QA: Quality assurance
CONCLUSION
Pharmaceutical manufacture and regulation is clearly an
international business. With the increasing emphasis on
Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2 harmonization efforts and standard setting, as well as mutual
recognition agreements, knowledge of foreign regulations
is a must both for understanding the future direction of
these efforts as well as for international supply of drug
149
Patel and Chotai: Documentation and records-Harmonized GMP requirements
products. It is anticipated that the approach described
here will be a useful reference work for those personnel
preparing and using documents for pharmaceutical
manufacture. It can serve as a tool for training staff and
may prove to be useful for quality assurance professionals
for assessment of compliance during self-inspection. It is
again emphasized that documentation is a very important
aspect of GMP and will enhance the visibility of the quality
assurance function.
REFERENCES
1. Website of Globepharm. The Advent of GMPs Available from: http://
www.globepharm.org/what-is-gmp/international-GMPs/advent-of-gmps.
html [Last cited on 2009 Dec 11].
2. Paula J. Shadle, Overview of GMPs, BioPharm International. Nov 15, 2004.
Available from:http://www.biopharminternational.com/biopharm/artile/
articleDetail.jsp?id=134225andpageID=2 [Last cited on 2007 Jan 27].
3. Website: World Health Organisation Available from: http://www.who.int/
medicines/areas/quality_safety/quality_assurance/production/en/index.
html [Last cited on 2008 July 14].
4. The Code of Federal Regulations Title 21-Food and Drugs Chapter 1 – Food
and Drug Administration Department of health and human services Subpart
C – Drugs: General part 211 Current Good Manufacturing Practice for
Finished PharmaceuticalsWebsite Available from: http://www.accessdata.
fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm.[Last cited on 2010
Apr 1].
5. EudraLex; The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union
Volume – 4; Good Manufacturing Practices Part I Basic Requirements
for Medicinal Products Available from: http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/
sectors/pharmaceuticals/documents/eudralex/vol-4/index_en.htm [Last
cited on 2010 May 7].
6. ICH Q7 Good Manufacturing Practice Guide For Active Pharmaceutical
Ingredients. Current step 4 version; November 2000 Web site Available
frpm:http://www.ich.org/LOB/media/MEDIA433.pdf [Last cited on
2010 Jan 1].
7. Quality assurance of pharmaceuticals. A compendium of guidelines and
related materials; ‘Good manufacturing practices and inspection’. Vol. 2.
Updated edition. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004. p. 58-85. Available
from: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2004/9241546190.pdf Part
I – WHO good manufacturing practices: main principles for Pharmaceutical
products http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2004/9241546190_part1.
pdf Part II – WHO good manufacturing practices: starting materialshttp://
whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2004/9241546190_part2.pdf [Last cited
on 2010 Feb 1].
8. Schedule M Good Manufacturing Practices and Requirements of Premises,
Plant and Equipment for Pharmaceutical Products; The Drugs And
Cosmetics Act And Rules The Drugs And Cosmetics Act, 1940, (As
Amended Up To The 30th June, 2005) And The Drugs And Cosmetics
Rules, 1945; (As Amended Up To The 30th June, 2005) Available from:
http://www.cdsco.nic.in/html/DrugsandCosmeticAct.pdf. [Last cited on
2007 Jan 27].
9. PIC/S Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention Pharmaceutical Inspection
Co-operation Scheme ‘Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal
Products PE 009-9 Part-I; September 2009 Available from: http://www.
picscheme.org/publication.php?id=4. [Last cited on 2010 Apr 1].
10. Guidance for Industry: Manufacturing, Processing or Holding Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredient, Draft Guidance; USFDA, Centre for Drug
Evaluation and Research CDER March 1998
11. White Paper, The 10 Golden Rules of GMP; PharmOut Pty Ltd, www.
pharmout.com.au; Version-01, 2008 Available from: http://www.pharmout.
com.au/downloads/white_paper_10_golden_rules.pdf [Last cited on 2010
May 6].
12. Documentation and Records: Website of GMP Online Consultancy
Available from: http://www.gmp-online-consultancy.com/gmp/
Documentation-Records.htm Accessed: [Last cited on 2010 May 8].
13. Documentation Requirement; Website of GMP quality Available from:
http://www.gmp-quality.com/documentation.html [Last cited on 2010
May 8].
Cite this article as: Patel KT, Chotai NP. Documentation and records:
Harmonized GMP requirements. J Young Pharmacists 2011;3:138-50.
Source of Support: Nil, Conflict of Interest: None declared.
150 Journal of Young Pharmacists Vol 3 / No 2