Process Validation
Compounding Quality Center of Excellence
Annual Conference
September 13, 2023
Neda Hamandi
Team Lead, Office of Compounding Quality and Compliance
www.fda.gov
Disclaimer
The information in this presentation was obtained from several resources, including but not limited to:
• eCFR :: 21 CFR Part 211 -- Current Good Manufacturing Practice for Finished Pharmaceuticals
• FDA Final Guidance for Industry, Process Validation: General Principles and Practices (January 2011)
• FDA Guidance for Industry PAT – A Framework for Innovative Pharmaceutical Development, Manufacturing, and Quality Assurance
• FDA Guidance for Industry Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development*
• FDA Guidance for Industry Q9 Quality Risk Management*
• FDA Guidance for Industry Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System*
• FDA Guidance for Industry Quality Systems Approach to Pharmaceutical CGMP regulations
• Current Good Manufacturing Practice—Guidance for Human Drug Compounding Outsourcing Facilities Under Section 503B of the FD&C
Act Guidance for Industry | FDA (Draft Guidance)
• PDA TR60: Process Validation
* Note: The ICH documents have been adopted by FDA and additional information on ICH documents can be found in FDA guidance for
industry documents.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Agenda
 Laws, Regulations, and Guidance
 PV Life Cycle Approach
 Stages of Process Validation
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
 Change Management
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Process Validation
PV is defined as the collection and evaluation of data, from the Process
Design stage through commercial production, which establishes
scientific evidence that a process is capable of consistently delivering
quality products.
PV involves a series of activities taking place over the lifecycle of the
product and process.
FDA Final Guidance for Industry, Process Validation: General Principles
and Practices (January 2011)
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Laws, Regulations, Guidance, and Best Practices
Items Descriptions
Laws (Statutes) The Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic (FD&C) Act is a federal law (statute) enacted by
Congress. Federal laws establish the legal framework within which FDA operates. The
FD&C Act can be found in the United States Code (U.S.C), which contains all general and
permanent U.S. laws, beginning at 21 U.S.C. 301.
Regulations FDA develops regulations (e.g., current good manufacturing practice (CGMP)
requirements) based on the statutes such as the FD&C Act or other laws under which
FDA operates. FDA regulations are also federal laws, but they are not part of the FD&C
Act. FDA regulations can be found in Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).
Guidance FDA follows the procedures required by its "Good Guidance Practice“ regulation to issue
FDA guidance. FDA guidance describes the agency’s current thinking on a regulatory
issue. In general, FDA guidance is not legally binding on the public or FDA.
Standards and Best Practices Standards are internationally agreed upon principles by experts; best practices are
procedures or processes shown by research and experience to produce optimal
results and is established or proposed as a standard suitable for widespread adoption.
Best practices are recommendations and not legally binding.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Process Validation in the Regulations
§ 211.100 Written procedures; deviations
a) There shall be written procedures for production and process control
designed to assure that the drug products have the identity, strength,
quality, and purity they purport or are represented to possess. Such
procedures shall include all requirements in this subpart. These written
procedures, including any changes, shall be drafted, reviewed, and
approved by the appropriate organizational units and reviewed and
approved by the quality control unit.
b) Written production and process control procedures shall be followed in
the execution of the various production and process control functions
and shall be documented at the time of performance. Any deviation
from the written procedures shall be recorded and justified.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Stages of Process Validation
Stage 1
Process Design
Evaluate / Confirm
Stage 2
Process Qualification
Changes
Design of Facilities
and Qualification of
Equipment and
Utilities
Process
Performance
Qualification
Changes
Distribute
Distribute
Stage 3
Continued Process Verification
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
General Elements for Successful PV
1. An integrated team approach to PV, as appropriate to the size and
scale of your organization, is recommended. Teams are composed of
experts from a variety of disciplines.
2. All studies should be planned and conducted according to sound
scientific principles, appropriately documented, and approved in
accordance with the established procedure appropriate for the stage
of the lifecycle.
3. The degree of control for process operations and process
parameters should be commensurate with their risk of impacting the
desired product quality attributes or in-process specifications.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Lifecycle Approach to Process Validation
Stages Parts
Stage 1
Process Design
Part I: Building and Capturing Process
Knowledge and Understanding
Part II: Establishing a Strategy for Process Control
Stage 2
Process Qualification
Part I: Design of a Facility and Qualification of
Utilities and Equipment
Part II: Process Performance Qualification
Stage 3
Continued Process Verification (CPV)
Initial CPV Planning
Short Term CPV
Long Term CPV
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Lifecycle Approach to Process Validation:
Stage 1, Process Design
• Part I: Building and Capturing Process Knowledge and
Understanding
• Part II: Establishing a Strategy for Process Control
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Stage 1, Process Design – Overview
The goal of this stage is to design a process suitable for commercial
production that consistently delivers a product that meets its pre-
defined quality attributes. Process Design defines the commercial
production process that will be documented in the master production
and control records.
It is important to recognize that quality cannot be tested into products
(i.e., quality is built in by design).
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Lifecycle Approach to Process Validation
Stage 1, Process Design
Part I: Building and Capturing Process Knowledge and Understanding
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Part I of Stage 1:
Building and Capturing Process Knowledge and Understanding
 Establish Quality Target Product Profile (QTPP), Critical Quality
Attributes (CQA), Critical Process Parameters (CPP), Critical
Material Attributes (CMA)
 Perform Quality Risk Management
 Define the Manufacturing Process
 Perform Process Characterization
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Establish QTPP, CQA, CPP, CMA
Quality Target Product Profile, QTPP, is a summary of the quality characteristics of a
finished drug product (like purity, sterility, stability, route of administration, dosage form,
and strength) that ideally will be achieved to ensure the desired quality and strength of the
drug product.
A Critical Quality Attribute, CQA, is a physical, chemical, biological, or microbiological
property or characteristic that must be within an appropriate limit, range, or distribution
to ensure the desired product quality (ICH Guidance for Industry Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical
Development).
A Critical Process Parameter, CPP, is a process parameter whose variability has an impact
on a CQA, and therefore should be monitored or controlled to ensure the process
produces the desired quality (ICH Guidance for Industry Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical
Development).
Critical Materials: Raw materials (e.g., Bulk Drug Substance (BDS) or excipients), finished
product containers, and closures are critical materials. Specifications must be established
for critical materials. These specifications are referred to as Critical Material Attributes
(CMAs).
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Relationship Between CMAs, CPPs, and CQAs
CPPs
CMAs CQAs
Manufacturing Unit
Operation
Input Materials Output Materials
or Product
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Part I of Stage 1:
Building and Capturing Process Knowledge and Understanding
(1 of 3)
 Establish QTPP, CQA, CPP, CMA
Perform Quality Risk Management
 Define the Manufacturing Process
 Perform Process Characterization
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Quality Risk Management (QRM)
 QRM is a systematic process for the assessment, control, communication, and review of risks to
the quality of the drug product across the product lifecycle. The application of risk management
principles and approaches is instrumental to effective decision-making in selecting the correct
CQAs and CPPs (PDA TR60).
 Risk assessment should occur early in the Design Stage and consciously be assessed, controlled, and communicated throughout the lifecycle of the finished drug product.
 With a lifecycle approach to PV that employs risk-based decision-making throughout the
lifecycle, the perception of criticality as a continuum rather than a binary state is useful.
 All attributes and parameters should be evaluated in terms of their roles in the process and
impact on the product or in-process material and reevaluated as new information becomes
available.
 The degree of control over those attributes or parameters should be commensurate with their
risk to the process and process output. In other words, a higher degree of control is appropriate
for attributes or parameters that pose a higher risk to the process and process output.
Higher
Risk
Higher Degree of
Control
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
ICH Q9 Risk Management Framework*
Initiate QRM Process
Risk Assessment
Hazard Identification
Risk Analysis
Risk Communication
Risk Evaluation
Unacceptable
Risk Control
Risk Reduction
Risk Acceptance
Risk Management Tools
Output / Result of the QRM Process
Risk Review
Review Events
*Figure 1: Overview of a typical quality risk management process from Q9(R1) Guidance
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Part I of Stage 1:
Building and Capturing Process Knowledge and Understanding
(3 of 3)
 Establish QTPP, CQA, CPP, CMA
 Perform Quality Risk Management
Define the Manufacturing Process
 Perform Process Characterization
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Define the Manufacturing Process
Level of Detail
Process requirements, including raw materials and order of operations
Set points and ranges for the process parameters
Identification and quantity of all material flows (e.g., additions, wastes, product streams)
Testing, sampling, and in-process controls (IPCs)
Hold times and hold conditions for product and additional solutions
Materials reconciliation
Estimated step yields and durations
Sizing for equipment, including such items as mixers or filtration units (e.g., filter surface area, filter volume, and pore size)
Specific identification (i.e., manufacturer, part number) for manufacturing (e.g., filters) and packaging components (e.g., vials, stoppers)
Other information necessary to successfully reproduce the process
 Actual and theoretical yields
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Part I of Stage 1:
Building and Capturing Process Knowledge and Understanding
(2 of 3)
 Establish QTPP, CQA, CPP, CMA
 Perform Quality Risk Management
 Define the Manufacturing Process
Perform Process Characterization
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Process Characterization
 Process Characterization is a set of documented studies in which operational
parameters are purposely varied to determine their effect on product quality
attributes and process performance.
 The output of process design and characterization is a strategy for process control, which is Part II of Stage I of Process Design.
 Process design and characterization should be conducted in accordance with
sound scientific methods and principles, including good documentation
practices (GDP).
 Process information available from literature sources (e.g., compounding
formulations or recipes, United States Pharmacopeia (USP) monographs) or
similar production processes already used can be leveraged to design and
characterize production processes for new products.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Lifecycle Approach to Process Validation (1 of 3)
Part II: Establishing a Strategy for Process Control
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Stage 1 Part II: Establishing a Strategy for Process Control
Categorization of Parameters and Establishment of Control
Strategy
 System Classifications / Boundaries (Direct vs. Indirect Impact
Systems Based on CQAs and CPPs)
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Process Control Strategy
A process control strategy is a planned set of controls, derived from
product and process understanding, which ensures process
performance and product quality.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Elements of a Process Control Strategy
A robust process control strategy encompasses all unit operations in the process. All product quality
attributes and process parameters, regardless of whether they are classified as critical, are included
in a comprehensive process control strategy, which includes the elements detailed below:
Facility
Personnel
Raw Material Controls
Process Parameters (Set Points and Ranges)
Process Monitoring (Data Review, Sampling, Testing)
In-Process and Release Specifications
Processing Times
Hold Times
Containers and Closures Control
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Process Parameters (Set Points and Ranges)
Proven Acceptable Range (PAR)
Normal Operating Range (NOR)
Set Point
Observation
Alert Limit Observation
Discrepancy
Discrepancy
Action Limit
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Stage 1, Part II: Establishing a Strategy for Process Control
 Categorization of Parameters and Establishment of Control Strategy
 System Classifications / Boundaries (Direct vs. Indirect Impact
Systems Based on CQAs and CPPs)
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
System Classification: Direct and Indirect Impact Systems
Direct Impact Systems
Indirect Impact Systems
• Directly impact CQAs and / or CPPs, and therefore have direct
impact on process and product quality.MP control.
• Should be commissioned and qualified.
Direct Impact System operations are often recorded in batch
records such as filling equipment and sterilization equipment (e.g.,
blenders, mixers, filters, autoclaves, depyrogenation ovens).
• May be referred to as indirect impact, no impact, process non-
critical, etc.
• Systems that do not directly impact any CPPs and CQAs and,
therefore, have no direct relationship to process and product
quality, and
• Require less scrutiny.
• Will only be commissioned.
Based on need, some processes may be commissioned, but not
qualified. For example, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) for the office space.
Their data will not be recorded in the batch / production record;
however, a catastrophic failure on their part could impact the
Direct Impact Systems they support.
System Boundaries define at which point the indirect systems end and the direct systems begin.
www.fda.gov
Computer and Electronic Systems
Computerized and electronic systems used for production applications are
qualified per 21 CFR part 11 and Data Integrity and Compliance with Drug CGMP
Questions and Answers Final Guidance for Industry and EU Annex 11.
Qualification criteria include, but are not limited to:
• Specificity
• Accuracy
• Data management
• Sensitivity
• Communication
• Electronic integration requirements of information technology compatibility
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Summary of Stage 1 Process Design
The representative list below summarizes the information needed to transition from Stage 1 (Process Design) to Stage 2 (Process Qualification) in the PV lifecycle.
• Quality Target Product Profile
(QTPP)
• Critical Quality Attributes (CQAs)
• Quality Risk Assessment
• Critical Process Parameters
(CPPs)
• Manufacturing Process Design
• Analytical Methods
• Process Characterization
• Process Validation Master Plan
• Process Control Strategy
• Manufacturing Technology
• Documentation Development
Process
Validation
Process Improvement / Optimization
Updated
Master Batch Record
Master Batch Record
www.fda.gov
Change Control
Lifecycle Approach to Process Validation
Stage 2: Process Qualification
• Part I: Design of a Facility and Qualification of Utilities and
Equipment
• Part II: Process Performance Qualification
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Stage 2, Part I
Design of a Facility and Qualification of Utilities and Equipment
 Commissioning, Factory Acceptance Test (FAT), and Site Acceptance Test (SAT)
 Qualification
(PQ)
 Installation Qualification (IQ), Operation Qualification (OQ), and Performance Qualification
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Understanding and Leveraging Commissioning,
FAT, and SAT
Commissioning
Commissioning verifies the facility, utility, and equipment (the “system”) are installed properly, function
properly, have the proper utilities connected correctly, (e.g., are the fans blowing in the right direction?), are
accessible (e.g., can I get to sampling points, or can I get the HEPA filter changed if it is installed too close to the
wall?), and thus was successfully turned over to the end user. Commissioning, when executed properly, is
important to support the success of the subsequent qualification activities.
FAT
FAT provides documented evidence a piece of equipment or system has been adequately tested at the
manufacturer’s facility and performs to the end user’s expectations prior to delivery to the end user. FAT is not
mentioned or discussed in the FDA PV guidance, but it provides an opportunity to head off problems by
finding any issues while it is still in the factory where it can be corrected more easily.
SAT
SAT provides documented evidence a piece of equipment or system has not been affected in the
transportation and has been adequately tested at the end user’s facility and performs to the end user’s
expectations. SAT is not mentioned or discussed in the FDA PV guidance, but it provides an opportunity to
arrange for either factory representatives or supplier service personnel to participate in the first start-up and
tests, and for the receiving site’s personnel to ask them questions.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Stage 2, Part I : Design of a Facility and Qualification of
Utilities and Equipment
 Commissioning, Factory Acceptance Test (FAT), and Site Acceptance Test (SAT)
 Qualification
 Installation Qualification (IQ), Operation Qualification (OQ), and Performance
Qualification (PQ)
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Qualification (IQ / OQ / PQ) of Equipment and Systems
Installation Qualification (IQ)
IQ provides documented verification all aspects of a facility, utility, or equipment that can affect
product quality (i.e., critical) adhere to approved specifications as defined in the URS (e.g., materials
of construction) and are correctly installed.
Operational Qualification (OQ)
OQ is the documented verification the facilities, systems, and equipment, as installed or modified,
operate as intended throughout the anticipated operating ranges.
Performance Qualification (PQ)
PQ is the documented evidence that provides a high degree of assurance the equipment and
systems function accurately and consistently according to predetermined specifications within the
operating ranges defined in Stage 1 in its operating environment.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Qualification Throughout the Lifecycle
After the successful qualification of the equipment and systems in the manufacturing facility, it is important to ensure
the equipment and systems are maintained in a state of control and operate in a manner consistent with their qualified
state throughout the product lifecycle.
This is done by:
Preventive Maintenance
Maintenance is performed routinely according to a defined schedule (e.g., the certification of HEPA filters every six
months).
Predictive Maintenance
Individual(s) assigned the responsibility to maintain equipment take advantage of available information, forecast
possible failures, and take maintenance action before a failure occurs.
Calibration
A calibration program assures data collected from instruments and devices are both precise and accurate within the
acceptable range. Periodic and annual calibration should be incorporated into the calibration program (may also be part
of a preventive maintenance program).
Requalification
Requalification may be required whenever qualified systems have been changed or modified. The extent and impact of
the change must be evaluated for their impact on the original qualification. Requalification is also routinely performed
on a periodic basis to ensure that systems continue to operate in their qualified state throughout the lifecycle of the
product. How often a system will need to be requalified will depend on the criticality of that system.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Summary of PV Stage 2: Part I
The typical system qualification sequence is displayed in the figure below.
Engineering
Installation
Start-up
System
Qualification
/ Verification
Step 1: Transfer Process Design requirements and CPP information
from Stage 1 Process Design
Step 2: Review to confirm system design (i.e., URS) is aligned with
Design Perform system risk or
process requirements
impact assessment to
determine which systems
Construction,
Fabrication,
Installation
Step 3: Perform FAT and SAT to confirm the system meets design
and system elements are
specification
critical to product quality
Commissioning
Testing
Step 4: Perform commissioning studies to confirm systems are in
reliable working order
Step 5: Evaluate information obtained during commissioning to
determine what can be leveraged during qualification
Step 6: Perform qualification studies (IQ / OQ / PQ) to ensure that
systems are capable of meeting process requirements
Develop Qualification
Protocol, including test
functions and acceptance
criteria, based on process
requirements and system
capabilities
Step 7: Evaluate qualification results and release system for PPQ
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Lifecycle Approach to Process Validation (2 of 3)
Stage 2: Process Qualification
Part II: Process Performance Qualification
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Process Performance Qualification, PPQ
PPQ combines the qualified facility, utilities, and equipment and trained personnel with the
commercial manufacturing process, control procedures, and components to produce the PPQ
batches. The goal of PPQ is to establish scientific evidence that the commercial production process
is reproducible and will consistently deliver quality products.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
PV Stage 2, Part II: Process Performance Qualification, PPQ
Prepare for PPQ
Readiness
Assessment
Prepare for PPQ by reviewing the status of activities required to be completed prior
to commencement of the PPQ batches.
Develop Strategy and
Approach
Design PPQ based on multiple considerations specific to the manufacturing
process and determine the number of manufacturing runs and sample plan.
Design of PPQ
Compile PPQ
Protocol
Document all of the necessary elements in the PPQ protocol, including pre-
determined acceptance criteria.
Execute the Process
Execute PPQ
Protocol
Perform the procedures as outlined in the PPQ protocol, including manufacturing
steps and testing of analytical samples.
Analyze PPQ Results
Against Acceptance
Criteria
Analyze Results and
Compile PPQ Report
Analyze the data obtained during PPQ following statistical methodology and
acceptance criteria from the PPQ protocol and address deviations and failures.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Analyze PPQ Results Against Acceptance Criteria
Sections of the PPQ Report
The PPQ report will typically include the following sections:
• Summary
• Deviations
• Methods and Materials
• Conclusions
• PPQ Results
• Approvals
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Aseptic Process Simulation (Media Fills) Where Does It Fit?
• An aseptic process simulation (APS) is designed to evaluate whether processes may pose
a risk to product sterility are adequately controlled.
• The terms “aseptic process simulation” and “media fills” are often used interchangeably.
• APS does not equal process validation; it is a component of process validation.
• APS is narrower in focus than PV in that the goal is primarily microbiological.
qualification – can product be made that is free from microbial contamination.
• APS can be done before or after PPQ. There are pros and cons to both.
• A media fill has to be completed before a firm releases any aseptically filled products.
• The FDA Compounding Quality Center of Excellence offers a free, self-guided on-line
course available here: Aseptic Process Simulations.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Lifecycle Approach to Process Validation (3 of 3)
Stage 3: Continued Process Verification
• Initial CPV Planning
• Short Term CPV
• Long Term CPV
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Stage 3: Continued Process Verification (CPV)
CPV provides ongoing assurance that during routine production the process
remains in a state of control.
Source: FDA Final Guidance for Industry, Process Validation: General Principles and Practices (January 2011)
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Key Elements of CPV
• Collect data (e.g., process parameters, test results)
• Analyze and review data
• Review trends and evaluate process performance
• Identify problems and determine whether action must be taken to
correct undesirable variation in the production, process, deviations,
or failures
• Ensure process remains in a state of control throughout the life cycle
• Incorporate process improvements
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
CPV Overview
Initial CPV Planning
Establishes:
• Data to include for review and analysis
(e.g., process parameters, testing
results, batch yields)
• Elements to measure (e.g., critical
process parameters (CPPs), in-process
controls (IPCs), Critical Quality
Attributes (CQAs), yields)
• Sampling plans
• Data collection and reporting
• Reporting frequency
• Data analysis methods (e.g., statistical
tools, trending methods)
• Action plan to respond to out-of-trend
results or observed variation
www.fda.gov
Overview of CPV (Stage 3)
Short-term CPV 6
Includes:
• Data are collected and reported per
the plan.
• Control limits, for any of the
parameters or elements defined in
the CPV plan, are created and
summarized in a short-term CPV
report.
• A report and long-term CPV
planning are outputs.
Long-term CPV 7
Includes:
• Parameters and product attributes
(e.g., CQAs, CPPs) are monitored
and trended.
• Reactions to trends are
commensurate with the risk
established throughout the PV
process.
• Periodic reporting based upon
frequency of manufacturing
Quote
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Data Collection Plans and Statistical
Procedures in the PV Lifecyle
A statistician (or person with
adequate training in statistical
process control (SPC))
techniques) is recommended
to develop the data collection
plan and statistical methods /
procedures used in measuring
and evaluating process stability
and process capability.
Commonly Used Statistical
Procedures Include:
• Run Charts
• Individual Value Plots
• Tolerance Intervals (TIs)
• Variance Components
• SPC Charts (I Charts) and
Capability Analysis
www.fda.gov
Examples of Data Collection Tools: Run Charts
A run chart is used to study collected data for trends or patterns over a specific
time period.
A run chart will help you:
• Monitor data over time to detect trends,
shifts, or cycles
• Compare / measure data before and after
the implementation of a change or corrective
action to measure impact
• Focus attention on important changes (i.e.,
not normal variation)
• Track useful information for predicting
trends.
X-axis: Units of time by which measurements are made
Y-axis: Attribute being measured
Centerline: Mean (or average)
www.fda.gov
Examples of Data Collection Tools: Individual Value Plot
An individual value plot displays the individual values in each sample to assess
and compare sample data distributions.
Each circle represents one reported value,
making it easy to spot outliers and see
distribution spread.
For example: Batch to batch and sample
positions within batch.
X-axis: Inter and intra batches being measured
Y-axis: Attribute being measured
www.fda.gov
Process Capability
Ability of a process to produce a product that will fulfill the requirements of
that product. A capability study is used to determine whether a process is
capable, which involves collecting samples over a period of time and
analyzing the samples. There are both complex and simple methods to
assess capability.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Assessing Process Capability in the
PV Lifecycle
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3
Example 1: Example 2:
Example 3:
% %
Specification = 90-110%
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Control Charts - Examples
Control Chart
Strength Values of 30 Lots of Product A Over 1 Year
120.00
115.00
US
110.00
105.00
UCL
100.00
Strength
95.00
LCL
90.00
LS
85.00
80.00
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Control Chart
Strength Values of 30 Lots of Product B Over 1 Year
120.00
115.00
UCL
US
110.00
105.00
100.00
Strength
95.00
90.00
LS
85.00
80.00
LCL
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
PV and Change Management
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
PV and Change Management (cont.)
 Change management is a systematic approach to proposing, evaluating, approving, implementing, and reviewing changes.*
 Before changes are implemented, proposed changes should be evaluated by teams composed of people with a diverse background, including ones familiar with the change at issue (e.g., manufacturing, quality) using pre-established
criteria.
 A description of the planned change, a well justified rationale for the change, an
implementation plan, and QU approval must be documented before
implementation.
 Depending on how the proposed change might affect product quality and safety,
additional process design and process qualification activities may be warranted.
 Quality risk management (QRM) should be utilized to evaluate proposed
changes.
*Source: ICH Guidance for Industry Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
PV Diagram
Stage 1: Process Design Stage 2: Process Qualification Stage 3: Continued
Process Verification
Design
PPQ Protocol Design,
Process Design Continued Process
Process Qualification
Review
Execution, and Report
Verification
Part II: Establishing a
Strategy for Process Control
Part II: Process
Performance Qualification
Part I: Building and Capturing
Process Knowledge and
Understanding
Part I: Design of a Facility and
Qualification of Utilities and
Equipment
Initial CPV
Planning
Establish QTPP,
CQA, CPP
Categorization of
Parameters and
Establishment of Control
Strategy
Commissioning
Prepare for PPQ
Perform Quality
Risk Assessment
FAT / SAT
Define the
Manufacturing
Process
System Classifications /
Boundaries (Direct vs.
Indirect Impact Systems
Based on CQAs and
CPPs)
Qualification
Objectives to be Achieved
Short-Term CPV
Design of PPQ
Execute the
Process
(PPQ Protocol)
Long-Term CPV
Perform Process
Characterization
IQ / OQ / PQ
PVMP and URS
Analyze PPQ
Results Against
Acceptance
Criteria
Manage Process
Changes
Risk Management
Change Management
Knowledge Management
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Regulatory Requirements
Regulatory requirements contained in the CFR include:
Regulatory Requirements Written Procedures; Deviations Sampling and Testing of In-process Materials and Drug Products Adequate Facilities, Maintenance, and Calibration Control of Microbial Contamination Annual Product Review www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
CFR
21 CFR 211.100, and
211.192
21 CFR 211.110
21 CFR 211.42(a), 211.63,
and 211.68(a)
21 CFR 211.113
21 CFR 211.180(e)
ICH Guidance
ICH is the International Council for Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human
Use. ICH is a joint effort to align regulations in what has become a global environment. The following ICH
documents have been adopted in published FDA guidance documents.
• ICH Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development
This guidance document on pharmaceutical development defines procedures for linking product and process
development planning to the final commercial process control strategy and quality system.
• ICH Q9 Quality Risk Management
This guidance document describes the use of a risk-based approach to pharmaceutical development and
manufacturing quality. These approaches identify and prioritize those process parameters and product quality
attributes with the greatest potential to affect product quality.
• ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System
This guidance document is intended to assist pharmaceutical manufacturers by describing a model for an
effective quality management system for the pharmaceutical industry, referred to as the Pharmaceutical
Quality System (PQS). To achieve the goals outlined in this guidance document, it is essential to integrate the
Process Design into the quality system.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Knowledge Management
Knowledge management is a “systematic approach to acquiring,
analyzing, storing, and disseminating information related to
products, manufacturing processes, and components.”
Source: ICH Guidance for Industry Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System
Why Is It Important?
Knowledge management supports how knowledge is acquired, analyzed,
stored, disseminated, and applied across the PV lifecycle. Information
should be consistently maintained, either manually or automatically,
depending on the system used by each firm.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Introduction to Legacy Products
Legacy products are existing products currently on the market for which
some current PV lifecycle concepts may not have been formally established
and/or implemented.
Manufacturers of legacy products can take advantage of the knowledge
gained from the original process development and qualification work to
develop a pathway for validation.
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
Pathway for Validating Legacy Products
Gap Analysis
A gap analysis helps to reveal
what elements are
missing (e.g., CQAs,
CPPs, control strategy,
qualification of a piece of
equipment) and needed to
complete PV.
Data Analysis and Risk
Assessment
Data analysis should show the
production process was robust
and reliably operating in a state
of control.
The extent of the validation
activities to perform will be
commensurate with the overall
risk as determined based on
the gap analysis and risk
assessment.
www.fda.gov
Stage 3: CPV
Questions?
www.fda.gov www.fda.gov
The End