CENTER FOR DRUG EVALUATION AND RESEARCH
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs:
Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
November 2023
Disclaimer: This paper is for discussion purposes only of stakeholder feedback and is not
a draft or final guidance. As such, this document is not intended to convey any current or
future requirements, recommendations, or policy related to distributed manufacturing.
Executive Summary
FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) established the
Framework for Regulatory Advanced Manufacturing Evaluation (FRAME)
initiative to foster a regulatory framework to support the adoption of advanced
manufacturing technologies that could benefit patients. FRAME prioritized
distributed manufacturing (DM) and point-of-care manufacturing (POC) as
two related technologies that have the potential to advance pharmaceutical
manufacturing. The discussion paper Distributed Manufacturing and Point-of-Care
Manufacturing of Drugs published on October 14, 2022 (October 2022 discussion
paper),1 and the public workshop The Regulatory Framework for Distributed
and Point-of-Care Pharmaceutical Manufacturing: An Opportunity for DM/POC
Stakeholder Engagement was held from November 14 to 16, 2022.2 To ensure that
FDA’s evaluation of the regulatory framework for these technologies is thorough,
stakeholders were invited to comment on the discussion paper and provide
feedback through moderated discussions at the public workshop.
This paper summarizes stakeholder feedback in areas such as terminology,
operating models, central and host sites, approaches for meeting product
specifications, comparisons to other regulated products, and international
harmonization. Stakeholders generally:
•
Identified areas in which they seek additional regulatory clarity regarding DM
technologies for drugs and biological products3
•
Seek assurance that regulations and policies are compatible with DM strategies
for drugs and biological products
•
Seek clarified regulatory expectations to facilitate the implementation of DM for
drugs and biological products
•
Seek international harmonization on the regulation of DM technologies to
facilitate the adoption of DM for drugs and biological products
1
2
3
For the discussion paper available on CDER’s FRAME initiative website at https://www.fda.gov/media/162157/
download?attachment, comments were submitted to https://www.regulations.gov, Docket No. FDA-2022-N-2316.
See CDER’s FRAME workshop website available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/news-events-human-drugs/fdapqri-
workshop-regulatory-framework-distributed-and-point-care-pharmaceutical-manufacturing.
All references to drugs include both human drugs and biological products (including those regulated by CBER), unless
otherwise specified.
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
2
In addition to summarizing stakeholder feedback, this paper describes CDER’s
actions to date and its action plan for the DM regulatory framework in alignment
with the four FRAME priorities:
1. Seek and analyze input
a) Receive input from stakeholders in response to the discussion paper and at
the public workshop (complete)
b) Engage participants in the CDER Emerging Technology Program (ETP) and
the Center for Biologics and Research (CBER) Advanced Technologies
Team Program (CATT)
c) Incorporate stakeholder feedback to address risks and clarify regulatory
expectations (priorities 2 and 3 below)
2. Address risks to ensure that regulations and policy are compatible with future
advanced manufacturing technologies
a) Conduct a comprehensive analysis of regulatory requirements applicable to
DM strategies
b) Assess the ability of FDA’s IT systems to receive and store location
information and inform inspections
3. Clarify expectations for stakeholders implementing advanced manufacturing
a) Develop guidance, as appropriate, to clarify areas of regulatory uncertainty
(three proposed draft guidances in development)4
b) Evaluate existing policy to enable adoption of suitable DM technologies
4. Harmonize regulatory approaches
a) Publish internationally harmonized guidance for industry Q13 Continuous
Manufacturing of Drug Substances and Drug Products (March 2023),5 as
many DM units may use continuous manufacturing (complete )
b) Coordinate with international regulatory partners to promote global adoption
of DM technologies
4
5
See the document titled CDER Guidance Agenda, New & Revised Draft Guidance Documents Planned for Publication in
Calendar Year 2023 (July 2023), available at https://www.fda.gov/media/134778/download.
FDA updates guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
3
I. Introduction
Advanced manufacturing technologies have the potential to improve the reliability
and robustness of manufacturing processes and supply chains and increase
timely access to quality medicines. As advanced manufacturing technologies are
emerging rapidly, FDA aims to foster a regulatory framework that supports the
adoption of advanced manufacturing technologies to benefit patients, keep pace
with innovation, and support public health. CDER established the Framework
for Regulatory Advanced Manufacturing Evaluation (FRAME) initiative to
provide clarity and reduce uncertainty for stakeholders aiming to use advanced
manufacturing technologies to produce quality drugs and biological products.6
FRAME’s goal is to identify potential regulatory areas of consideration and develop
an action plan to address the regulatory framework for advanced manufacturing
technologies. FRAME’s four priorities are to:
1. Seek and analyze input to ensure that FDA’s understanding of advanced
manufacturing technologies for drugs and biological products is thorough and
the analysis of the regulatory framework is science- and risk-based
2. Address risks to ensure that regulations and policy are compatible with future
advanced manufacturing technologies
3. Clarify expectations for stakeholders implementing advanced manufacturing
4. Harmonize regulatory approaches to ensure that global regulatory practice is
clear to stakeholders implementing advanced manufacturing
To address the first priority above, FDA engaged stakeholders on distributed
manufacturing (DM) and POC technologies in two different forums. The first was
a discussion paper Distributed Manufacturing and Point-of-Care Manufacturing of
Drugs for public comment in the Federal Register.
7 The discussion paper presented
areas of consideration and potential policy development identified by evaluating
the regulatory framework for DM and POC technologies. The second was a
6
7
All references to drugs include both human drugs and biological products (including those regulated by CBER), unless
otherwise specified.
See the document titled Discussion Paper: Distributed Manufacturing and Point-of-Care Manufacturing of Drugs; Request
for Information and Comments that published in the Federal Register of October 14, 2022 (87 FR 62416).
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
4
3-day public workshop held with the Product Quality Research Institute (PQRI)
on The Regulatory Framework for Distributed and Point-of-Care Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing: An Opportunity for DM/POC Stakeholder Engagement that was
held from November 14 to 16, 2022.8 The public workshop included presentations
by stakeholders developing DM and POC technologies and moderated discussion
sessions for all participants on areas such as terminology, operating models,
central and host sites, the pharmaceutical quality system (PQS),9 and control
strategies and specifications.
The sections of this paper that follow: (1) summarize stakeholder feedback on
the DM and POC regulatory framework received through public comments on
the October 2022 discussion paper and at the public workshop; and (2) provide
a description of FDA’s planned actions to address the regulatory framework
concerning these advanced manufacturing technologies.
II. Summary of Stakeholder Feedback
A. Terminology
The October 2022 discussion paper included terminology describing DM and POC
manufacturing, based on preliminary stakeholder engagements10 regarding these
technologies.
In written comments and through discussion during the PQRI workshop,
stakeholders provided the following feedback with respect to the terminology used
in the October 2022 discussion paper. Stakeholder feedback clarified that not all
DM units are intended to be mobile (i.e., mobility may not be a defining feature of a
DM unit).
Stakeholders noted that the term point-of-care (POC) describes a manufacturing
location, rather than a manufacturing technology. For example, health care
providers might understand the term to mean a location where samples are
collected or a test is performed on a patient. Stakeholders shared that POC
manufacturing might not always be a subset of DM because, except for some
8
9
10
See the FDA/PQRI workshop agenda and materials available at https://pqri.org/fda_pqri_poc_dm_workshop/.
See the internationally harmonized guidance for industry Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System (April 2009).
Preliminary stakeholder engagements include a 2021 report titled Innovation in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing on the
Horizon: Technical Challenges, Regulatory Issues, and Recommendations issued by the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine, available at https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/26009/innovations-in-pharmaceutical-
manufacturing-on-the-horizon-technical-challenges-regulatory, and include industry meetings with ETP and CATT.
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
5
applications of so-called self-contained distributed manufacturing,
11 POC
manufacturing might not be intended to be part of a decentralized manufacturing
strategy or entail the use of DM units.
Additionally, stakeholders noted that POC is an existing term used differently in
several medical product areas. Feedback highlighted existing products that some
stakeholders consider to be made at POC (e.g., certain radiopharmaceuticals
covered in 21 CFR part 211 and positron emission tomography (PET) drugs
covered in part 212 (21 CFR part 212)). Other products that stakeholders
suggested could be considered to be made at POC include human cellular and
tissue-based products (HCT/Ps) produced at or near a medical health care facility
(HCF) accommodating the patients receiving these products or certain medical
devices that process blood or HCT/Ps. Stakeholders shared the concern that any
new elements of regulatory framework should avoid disrupting existing POC-
related articles, processes, and operations.
B. DM PQSs
The October 2022 discussion paper presented the following two potential PQS
approaches for DM: (1) host sites networked and overseen by a centralized PQS,
and (2) a unit with its own PQS (decentralized PQS).
Stakeholders supported the reasoning that a centralized PQS model is essential to
DM for CDER-regulated products, especially to ensure regulatory compliance. (See
also section II.H below.) Some stakeholders suggested that centralized control over
remote manufacturing locations could provide quality oversight by sharing real-time
data and documentation through a digital network across a fleet of DM units. Some
explained that existing tools, such as cloud-based data management systems and
digital connections, could be applied to permit a centralized PQS site to oversee
and ensure consistent drug product quality across all manufacturing locations
under its control. Stakeholders proposed that a designated person or designated
people (e.g., fleet administrators) could be responsible for managing DM units
deployed to different host sites. Feedback suggested that information to support
that the centralized PQS has adequate oversight of multiple DM units across
multiple geographical locations could be provided in a regulatory submission and
assessed through facility evaluation.
Stakeholders also suggested that a centralized PQS, similar to traditional
manufacturing locations, might help to ensure site-to-site consistency through
oversight of starting materials, active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), and
inactive ingredients for each host site. Some proposed that a centralized inventory
11
Self-contained distributed manufacturing is not a term that FDA has necessarily adopted, but, for ease of reference, this
paper will use this term to refer to the subset of manufacturing that stakeholders consider to be a subset of DM.
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
6
might distribute to host sites appropriately sourced, qualified, and released starting
materials; APIs; or inactive ingredients. Some feedback also suggested that
electronic safeguards, such as kitting and barcoding, could help ensure that only
qualified and released raw/starting materials and validated standard operating
procedures (SOPs) are used with the manufacturing unit. Some explained
that the central site could also collect, hold, and test retention and stability
samples to control the consistency of product attributes across manufacturing
locations. Stakeholders also stated that deviation, corrective action, and change
management through a centralized PQS (rather than a decentralized PQS) might
more effectively ensure product consistency across host sites. Some opined that
specific mechanisms may be necessary to contemporaneously manage deviations,
failure investigations, corrective actions, and changes across a network of host
sites. Stakeholders did not address who, either central or local personnel, would
need to perform these and other quality system functions.
Stakeholders indicated that a decentralized PQS model may not be preferable
for all traditional facilities that manufacture CDER-regulated product due to the
need for local control over raw and starting materials and product consistency. In
contrast, some stakeholders explained that both centralized and decentralized
PQS models may be applicable for some CBER-regulated products. For example,
starting materials for these products (e.g., autologous T cells) are patient-specific
and may have inherent variability not applicable to CDER-regulated products; thus,
different considerations may be needed for their control.
C. DM Applicants
Stakeholders noted that the types of DM applicants may differ among CBER- and
CDER-regulated products. Stakeholders opined that an HCF might be an applicant
and responsible for complying with CGMP requirements for CBER-regulated
products, such as HCT/Ps; however, some opined that such a model may be less
suited for CDER-regulated products. Stakeholders further opined that applicants
of CDER-regulated products could either own and operate or contract the site
controlling the centralized PQS, similar to contracting a traditional brick-and-mortar
contract manufacturing organization.
D. Operators
Stakeholders posited that traditional manufacturing personnel12 would likely
operate most DM units; however, some predicted that self-contained DM
units might be operated by either traditional manufacturing personnel or those
affiliated with the HCF hosting the unit. Stakeholders proposed that, in some
12
See 21 CFR 211.25.
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
7
cases, employees of either the applicant or a third-party contractor might operate
self-contained DM units. Some suggested that operators might be trained and
overseen by the centralized PQS to be responsible for operating a unit at the
host site. Multiple stakeholders suggested that the operator of a self-contained
DM unit for CDER-regulated products would be responsible for ensuring that
the unit is used appropriately (e.g., per approved instructions for use or user
manuals) within validated operating conditions and used for completing appropriate
training. Others suggested that the operator for CBER-regulated products might be
expected to perform extensive operations that include manipulation of raw
materials and/or manufacturing equipment and execution of test methods. Some
explained that the extent of operational and quality responsibilities delegated to the
unit operator might depend on the features of a given technology and the
complexity of the product, which in some cases might require an assessment of
operator performance at host sites.
Stakeholders stated that a centralized PQS and onboard technology could manage
operator access, limiting operation to those who are appropriately qualified.
Stakeholders proposed that manufacturers might establish a standardized training
strategy to qualify unit operators. Some suggested that such training could be
communicated electronically to individual operators at host sites and/or through
augmented reality training. In general, stakeholders held the view that standardized
training developed and maintained by the centralized PQS can contribute to
consistent drug product quality and process performance across all manufacturing
locations.
E. Establishments
The October 2022 discussion paper identified that considering a different
approach for registration and listing of DM units may be needed.13 The discussion
paper acknowledged that a DM establishment might consist of mobile DM units
connected or networked to a single, centralized PQS.
Although stakeholders explained that manufacturers might maintain real-time
location information for mobile units, which could be detected by a global
positioning system (GPS), such an approach could potentially raise operational
questions. For example, some suggested that CDER’s facility catalog may need
to accommodate an FDA Establishment Identifier number that is able to identify
DM units. Stakeholders proposed various mechanisms for reporting DM unit
location changes, such as supplemental applications (e.g., changes being effected
supplements), annual reports, and annual updates to master files. Feedback
suggested that any such approach would need to be sufficiently timely or frequent,
13
The regulations in 21 CFR 207.1 define establishment as “a place of business under one management at one general
physical location. . . .”
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
8
based on the mobility of the technology. Some explained that using existing
regulatory processes for frequent updates to an application could be a significant
burden on both the applicant and FDA.
Stakeholders stated that current regulations may not need to be modified to
accommodate the registration and listing of stationary DM units; however, some
explained that manufacturers who operate mobile DM units may be required
to make multiple and/or frequent updates to the physical address of the unit
identifying each change in location to facilitate inspection by FDA. Stakeholders
proposed that manufacturers could register a central site at a fixed location and
register a fixed location as part of that registration and identify the mobile DM units
under the control of the centralized PQS. Some stakeholders noted that a similar
approach is used to register mobile establishments for blood collection.
F. Changing and Adding Locations of DM Units
The October 2022 discussion paper acknowledged that, under the existing
framework, applicants might need to demonstrate bioequivalence and/or generate
analytical comparability data, conduct method transfer and validation, and generate
stability data for each new location of a DM unit.
Stakeholders stated that the need for these data could be prohibitively burdensome
for applicants because DM units may be deployed to different locations within and/
or among host sites and may make smaller-than-traditional batch sizes. Although
drug product quality should be consistent across all DM units, some stakeholders
opined that there may not be a need for comparability, validation, and stability data
to support implementation at every new location because the risk to drug product
quality may be mitigated if units are demonstrated to be cloned or like-for-like.
However, some stakeholders noted that external factors beyond the DM unit, such
as environment, utilities, personnel, and associated control procedures, might need
to be controlled to ensure process performance and drug product quality at new
manufacturing locations.
Most stakeholders agreed that the performance of DM units at a new location
should be evaluated to ensure consistent drug product quality, but many also
agreed that the process to submit these data in an amendment or a supplement
to an application could burden applicants making multiple or frequent location
changes. In addition, they acknowledged that FDA’s assessment workload to
review such information could drastically increase. As a result, some stakeholders
proposed alternative approaches wherein data to support new locations could be
generated during product development and submitted and assessed in an original
application.
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
9
One approach proposed by stakeholders centered on the use of existing
assessment tools that have appropriate supporting data, such as comparability
protocols and/or identified established conditions, to define criteria that must be
met following a move to a new location. Another stakeholder proposal advocated
for incorporating DM unit location moves into the process development studies
to reduce the data needed to support postapproval moves and/or establish an
operational envelope (e.g., qualification/validation and environmental parameters,
utility requirements) within which a DM unit would operate. Some explained
that there could continue to be a need to perform installation and operational
qualification at each new manufacturing location. Stakeholders indicated that the
approaches described above for demonstrating product comparability and process
consistency could be more challenging for CBER-regulated products, given the
types of starting materials (e.g., autologous T cells) and their inherent variability.
Generally, stakeholders opined that the scope and nature of the data and
information needed to support a new manufacturing location should be informed by
the capabilities of the DM unit, the potential risk of a new location to drug product
quality, and operator training.
Some stakeholders stated that employing dedicated operators who move with a
unit could reduce the risk to process and equipment performance and drug product
quality. However, some noted that this type of approach might not be feasible for
DM units that move frequently and/or over large geographical distances. In these
scenarios, stakeholders noted that new personnel may need to be trained and
qualified to operate DM units at each new location.
G. Inspections
The October 2022 discussion paper acknowledged that FDA’s establishment
evaluation and inspection functions could face logistical and resource
challenges due to: (1) the mobility and dispersion of DM units, (2) an increase in
manufacturing locations, (3) the intent to manufacture in or near nontraditional host
sites, and (4) the intent to operate beyond one physical location (i.e., centralized
PQS and host sites).
The most commonly proposed inspection model by stakeholders was the
inspection of a centralized PQS site, conducted on a risk-based frequency
consistent with FDA’s current procedures for risk-based inspection schedules.
Stakeholders also encouraged the use of alternative tools (e.g., remote regulatory
assessments) and advanced technology (e.g., augmented reality glasses) for host
site assessments.
Another suggested scenario was for FDA to conduct preapproval or prelicense
inspections of host sites to support initial DM implementation, and then the
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
10
centralized PQS site would perform future host site evaluations that FDA could
review when inspecting the centralized PQS site. Stakeholder rationale for this
approach was based on the premise that cloned or like-for-like DM units reduce
risks to drug product quality. Some explained that other factors, such as host site
environmental and microbial controls, that are external to the DM unit at host sites
should continue to be subject to FDA evaluation, especially for nontraditional host
site environments.
H. Considerations for Meeting Established Specifications
In general, stakeholders held the view that the intended uses and capabilities of
self-contained DM units may impact the ability to use traditional tools to control
quality risks. For example, some posited that future host sites may not contain
traditional quality control laboratories, and operators may not be traditional
manufacturing operators (e.g., quality control analysts). Several stakeholders
explained that rapid, nontraditional approaches to release testing might be
needed for the viability of self-contained DM units. The most common approach
that stakeholders proposed was the use of process analytical technology (PAT)
to enable real-time release testing. Although PAT has been developed for
manufacturing processes in traditional facilities, stakeholders noted that most of
these tools have not been miniaturized to the scale required for a self-contained
DM unit. Some stakeholders also proposed approaches that do not rely on
real-time or end-product testing, including modeling and digital twins, parametric
release, and conditional release. Stakeholders postulated that self-contained
DM units could offer an advanced level of understanding about processes and
products, which, based on risks, might justify a combination of control approaches.
Some stakeholders also supported that appropriate testing strategies may be
product or technology specific, and risk assessments might determine whether
some uncertainties can only be monitored and controlled through end-product
testing.
A particular focus of stakeholders was quality testing for microbial and adventitious
agents, which typically generate results within 7 to 14 days and could delay the
administration of product to patients. Stakeholders noted that rapid safety testing
methods for microbial and adventitious agents have seen limited implementation.
Therefore, some stakeholders proposed the potential combination of traditional and
emerging methods, with other approaches, to ensure microbial and adventitious
agent safety. Some noted that negative-to-date sterility results could permit rapid
product release, while traditional testing results could provide confirmation or
lead to initiation of risk mitigation measures. Some stakeholders noted that such
a process is analogous to the approach used for products with short half-lives
(e.g., radiopharmaceuticals) for which sterility testing is performed after a dose
has been administered and protocols are established to address a failed sterility
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
11
test. Stakeholders also proposed that sterility testing may not be necessary for
every batch if a DM unit is a fully closed system that is appropriately validated to
consistently manufacture sterile products.
Implementation of DM stability programs was an area of consideration for several
stakeholders who noted that the design of stability programs might depend on a
given technology and/or product. An example given was drug products intended for
patient administration within short time frames. Stakeholders seek guidance on the
stability data (e.g., time-points, methods) needed to support short expiry periods.
Batch size was a stakeholder consideration for release and stability testing
strategies. Stakeholders noted that self-contained DM units might be designed
to produce small batch sizes (even single doses) and noted that destructive
end-product testing of such batches may not be feasible. Some stakeholders
proposed that samples produced from runs performed immediately before or
after a run producing material for patient administration (i.e., sub-batches) might
be used for release and stability testing. Some noted similarities between such a
proposed approach and the existing approach used for PET drugs. Stakeholders
also proposed that samples might be generated by additional process runs (i.e.,
batches) performed before and/or after the run that produced the dose for patient
administration, provided that the samples used for release and stability testing are
representative and predictive of the administered batch.
The October 2022 discussion paper also posited that applicants who are not
present at host sites will face challenges with ensuring that any rejected
manufacturing components are quarantined, disposed of, and investigated.
To mitigate this issue, stakeholders proposed that a centralized PQS could provide
oversight and consistency in document management and training, deviation
identification and handling, investigations, change controls, corrective actions and
preventive actions (CAPA), and batch releases. Stakeholders proposed several
approaches to control release of finished products, including using cloud-based
and other electronic systems (e.g., artificial intelligence) at the centralized PQS
site to review batch records and data and/or make automated decisions about
batch disposition (e.g., by using review by exception algorithms). Some noted
it might be feasible for applicants to perform timely batch review and approval
through the centralized PQS for all units at host sites (e.g., time zone-specific
teams), while others ventured that sufficiently robust and appropriately validated
automated systems might be able to ensure proper batch decisions. Stakeholders
did not generally address procedures for handling rejected material at host sites
or the processes by which self-contained DM units might physically detain and/
or destroy nonconforming products to prevent use. Stakeholders noted that some
operators may not be traditional manufacturing personnel and the extent of their
quality responsibilities might be limited by their organization, though some noted
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
12
that robust process controls might assist in ensuring that only conforming product
is administered to patients.
I. Other Regulated Products and Harmonization
1. Other Regulated Products
Some stakeholders highlighted similarities among drug products made in self-
contained DM units and PET drugs and other radiopharmaceuticals, noting that
such drug products might be made in enclosed, automated systems. Some
stakeholders observed that PET drug products typically have short half-lives
and, as a result, the final manufacturing step (e.g., radiolabeling) is performed
in proximity to patient care. Some noted the unique considerations for ensuring
quality of PET drugs in this environment and the specific regulations that cover
these products (i.e., part 212). Stakeholders suggested that some approaches
used in the regulation of PET drugs could inform the regulation of self-contained
DM units due to the potential parallels between the manufacturing of PET drugs
and manufacturing in a self-contained DM unit. For example, some noted that
processes used to train and qualify manufacturing unit operators and handle
and investigate nonconformances at PET sites might inform approaches for self-
contained DM units. Additionally, some noted that digital tools (such as cloud-
based systems) are currently used to store manufacturing records that a remote
site can access and use to ensure drug product quality. Several stakeholders
speculated that the testing and release strategies used in the manufacture of
PET drugs and other radiopharmaceuticals could be examined for applicability
to self-contained DM units.
Some stakeholders cautioned that certain approaches for PET drug
manufacturing may not be appropriate for DM. One difference noted was that
PET drugs are a narrow pharmaceutical class with distinct qualities that require
manufacturing in proximity to patients and for which the HCF is generally the
applicant who operates a synthesizer and is responsible for quality oversight
and CGMP compliance. Some also noted that certain manufacturing process
can be more complex than radiolabeling and might result in higher lot-to-lot
variability relative to PET drugs.
Although the October 2022 discussion paper excluded manufacturing units
intended for drug compounding (i.e., drugs not adhering to the specification
of an approved regulatory submission), stakeholders noted potential parallels
between DM and drug compounding. The FRAME initiative continues to focus
on products that are the subject of approved applications (i.e., products that
would be marketed under a new drug application, an abbreviated new drug
application, or a biologics license application).
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
13
2. International Harmonization
Stakeholders expressed a desire for international harmonization on
terminologies and principles to facilitate the adoption of DM. Some suggested
that harmonization through global regulatory guidelines (e.g., International
Council for Harmonisation, pharmaceutical inspection convention/
pharmaceutical inspection co-operation scheme (PIC/S)) could mitigate
uncertainty associated with deployment of manufacturing units to host sites
across broad geographical locations. Such an example provided was a
central site in one regulatory jurisdiction with host sites in other jurisdictions.
Stakeholders were clear that international collaboration among stakeholders and
global regulators will be important, as these technologies continue to develop
and deploy.
III. Action Plan Summary
1. Seek and analyze input to ensure that FDA’s understanding of
DM technologies is thorough and analysis of the regulatory
framework is science- and risk-based
Stakeholder Feedback:
Stakeholders developing DM technologies for drugs and biological products
have identified areas in which they seek additional regulatory clarity.
FDA Action:
•
•
•
Publish Distributed Manufacturing and Point-of-Care Manufacturing of Drugs
discussion paper for public comment to share information with the public and
request input on discussion questions related to the regulatory framework.
STATUS Completed with 60-day comment period that closed on December
13, 2022
In partnership with PQRI, hold public workshop on the Regulatory Framework
for Distributed and Point of Care Pharmaceutical Manufacturing: An
Opportunity for DM/POC Stakeholder Engagement to discuss stakeholder
input on these technologies.
STATUS Completed November 16, 2022
Engage participants in the CDER Emerging Technology Program (ETP) and
the Center for Biologics and Research (CBER) Advanced Technologies Team
Program (CATT) who are developing DM technologies and visit development
sites.
STATUS Ongoing
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
14
•
Incorporate input and feedback into priorities 2 and 3 below.
STATUS Ongoing
2. Address risks to ensure that regulations and policy are
compatible with future DM technologies
Stakeholder Feedback:
Stakeholders seek assurance that regulations and policies are compatible with
DM strategies for drugs and biological products.
FDA Action:
•
Conduct a comprehensive analysis of regulatory requirements applicable to
DM strategies for drugs and biological products.
STATUS Ongoing
•
Assess the ability of FDA’s IT systems to receive and store location
information and inform inspections.
STATUS Ongoing
3. Clarify expectations for stakeholders implementing DM
Stakeholder Feedback:
Stakeholders seek clarified regulatory expectations to facilitate the
implementation of DM for drugs and biological products.
FDA Action:
•
Develop guidance, as appropriate, to clarify areas of regulatory uncertainty,
including the following proposed draft guidances: Considerations for Complying
with 21 CFR 211.110, Approaches to Meeting CGMP Requirements for
Distributed Manufacturing, and Advanced Manufacturing Technologies
Designation Program Designated Technologies in Drug and Biological
Products.
14
STATUS Ongoing
•
Evaluate existing policy, incorporating stakeholder feedback, and develop
guidance, as needed, to enable adoption of suitable DM technologies.
STATUS Ongoing
14
See the document titled CDER Guidance Agenda, New & Revised Draft Guidance Documents Planned for Publication in
Calendar Year 2023 (July 2023), available at https://www.fda.gov/media/134778/download.
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
15
4. Harmonize to ensure that global regulatory practice is clear to
stakeholders implementing DM
Stakeholder Feedback:
Stakeholders seek international harmonization on the regulation of DM
technologies to facilitate the adoption of DM for drugs and biological products.
FDA Action:
•
Publish internationally harmonized guidance for industry Q13 Continuous
Manufacturing of Drug Substances and Drug Products.15
STATUS Completed March 1, 2023
•
Coordinate with international regulatory partners to promote the global
adoption of DM technologies.
STATUS Ongoing
15
FDA anticipates that many DM units, including self-contained DM units, will use continuous manufacturing.
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
16
Appendix: Abbreviations
Following is a list of abbreviations used in this paper:
Acronym Explanation
API Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
CAPA Corrective Actions and Preventive Actions
CATT CBER Advanced Technologies Team
CBER Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research
CDER Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CGMP Current Good Manufacturing Practice
DM Distributed Manufacturing
ETP Emerging Technology Program
FRAME Framework for Regulatory Advanced Manufacturing
Evaluation
GPS Global Positioning System
HCF Health Care Facility
HCT/Ps Human Cellular and Tissue-Based Products
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IT Information Technology
PAT Process Analytical Technology
PET Positron Emission Tomography
PIC/S Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention/Pharmaceutical
Inspection Co-operation Scheme
POC Point-of-Care Manufacturing
PQRI Product Quality Research Institute
PQS Pharmaceutical Quality System
SOP Standard Operating Procedures
Distributed Manufacturing of Drugs: Stakeholder Feedback and Action Plan
17
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
www.fda.gov
Office of Pharmaceutical Quality
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Avenue
Silver Spring, Maryland 20993