Guidance for Industry
Q10 Pharmaceutical
Quality System
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)
April 2009
ICH
Guidance for Industry
Q10 Pharmaceutical
Quality System
Additional copies are available from:
Office of Communication
Division of Drug Information
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Ave.,Bldg. 51, Room 2201
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
(Tel) 301-796-3400
http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm
Office of Communication, Outreach and
Development, HFM-40
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research
Food and Drug Administration
1401 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852-1448
(Tel) 1-800-835-4709 or 301-827-1800
http://www.fda.gov/cber/guidelines.htm.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)
April 2009
ICH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION (1, 1.1)................................................................................................ 1
II. PHARMACEUTICAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ................................. 2
A. Scope (1.2).......................................................................................................................................2
B. Relationship of ICH Q10 to Regional GMP Requirements, ISO Standards,
and ICH Q7 (1.3)............................................................................................................................3
C. Relationship of ICH Q10 to Regulatory Approaches (1.4).........................................................3
D. ICH Q10 Objectives (1.5) ..............................................................................................................3
E. Enablers: Knowledge Management and Quality Risk Management (1.6) ............................... 4
F. Design and Content Considerations (1.7) ....................................................................................4
G. Quality Manual (1.8)......................................................................................................................5
III. MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY (2)...................................................................... 5
A. Management Commitment (2.1)...................................................................................................5
B. Quality Policy (2.2).........................................................................................................................6
C. Quality Planning (2.3)....................................................................................................................6
D. Resource Management (2.4)..........................................................................................................7
E. Internal Communication (2.5) ......................................................................................................7
F. Management Review (2.6) ............................................................................................................7
G. Management of Outsourced Activities and Purchased Materials (2.7)....................................7
H. Management of Change in Product Ownership (2.8) .................................................................8
IV. CONTINUAL IMPROVEMENT OF PROCESS PERFORMANCE AND
PRODUCT QUALITY (3) ............................................................................................... 8
A. Lifecycle Stage Goals (3.1) ............................................................................................................8
B. Pharmaceutical Quality System Elements (3.2) ..........................................................................9
V. CONTINUAL IMPROVEMENT OF THE PHARMACEUTICAL QUALITY
SYSTEM (4) .................................................................................................................... 13
A. Management Review of the Pharmaceutical Quality System (4.1)..........................................13
B. Monitoring of Internal and External Factors That Can Have an Impacton the
Pharmaceutical Quality System (4.2).........................................................................................13
C. Outcomes of Management Review and Monitoring (4.3).........................................................14
VI. GLOSSARY (5)............................................................................................................... 15
Annex I: Potential Opportunities To Enhance Science- and Risk-Based Regulatory
Approaches *............................................................................................................... 18
Annex 2: Diagram of the ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System Model…..……………19
i
Guidance for Industry1
Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It
does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.
You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes
and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for
implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the appropriate
number listed on the title page of this guidance.
I. INTRODUCTION (1, 1.1)2
This internationally harmonized guidance is intended to assist pharmaceutical manufacturers by
describing a model for an effective quality management system for the pharmaceutical industry,
referred to as the pharmaceutical quality system. Throughout this guidance, the term
pharmaceutical quality system refers to the ICH Q10 model.
ICH Q10 describes one comprehensive model for an effective pharmaceutical quality system that
is based on International Organization for Standardization (ISO) quality concepts, includes
applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP) regulations, and complements ICH “Q8
Pharmaceutical Development” and ICH “Q9 Quality Risk Management.”3 ICH Q10 is a model
for a pharmaceutical quality system that can be implemented throughout the different stages of a
product lifecycle. Much of the content of ICH Q10 applicable to manufacturing sites is currently
specified by regional GMP requirements. ICH Q10 is not intended to create any new
expectations beyond current regulatory requirements. Consequently, the content of ICH Q10 that
is additional to current regional GMP requirements is optional.
1 This guidance was developed within the Expert Working Group (Quality) of the International Conference on
Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) and has been
subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH process. This document has been
endorsed by the ICH Steering Committee at Step 4 of the ICH process, June 2008. At Step 4 of the process, the final
draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan, and the United States.
2 Arabic numbers reflect the organizational breakdown of the document endorsed by the ICH Steering Committee at
Step 4 of the ICH process, June 2008.
3 These guidances are available on the Internet at http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm. We update
guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the CDER guidance
page at http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm
1
ICH Q10 demonstrates industry and regulatory authorities’ support of an effective
pharmaceutical quality system to enhance the quality and availability of medicines around the
world in the interest of public health. Implementation of ICH Q10 throughout the product
lifecycle should facilitate innovation and continual improvement and strengthen the link between
pharmaceutical development and manufacturing activities.
FDA's guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable
responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should
be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are
cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or
recommended, but not required.
II. PHARMACEUTICAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
A. Scope (1.2)
This guidance applies to the systems supporting the development and manufacture of
pharmaceutical drug substances (i.e., active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs)) and drug
products, including biotechnology and biological products, throughout the product lifecycle.
The elements of ICH Q10 should be applied in a manner that is appropriate and proportionate to
each of the product lifecycle stages, recognizing the differences among, and the different goals
of, each stage (see section IV (3)).
For the purposes of this guidance, the product lifecycle includes the following technical activities
for new and existing products:
• Pharmaceutical Development
o Drug substance development
o Formulation development (including container/closure system)
o Manufacture of investigational products
o Delivery system development (where relevant)
o Manufacturing process development and scale-up
o Analytical method development
• Technology Transfer
o New product transfers during development through manufacturing
o Transfers within or between manufacturing and testing sites for marketed products
• Commercial Manufacturing
o Acquisition and control of materials
o Provision of facilities, utilities, and equipment
o Production (including packaging and labeling)
o Quality control and assurance
o Release
o Storage
2
o Distribution (excluding wholesaler activities)
• Product Discontinuation
o Retention of documentation
o Sample retention
o Continued product assessment and reporting
B. Relationship of ICH Q10 to Regional GMP Requirements, ISO Standards,
and ICH Q7 (1.3)
Regional GMP requirements, the ICH guidance “Q7 Good Manufacturing Practice Guidance for
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients,” and ISO quality management system guidelines form the
foundation for ICH Q10. To meet the objectives described below, ICH Q10 augments GMPs by
describing specific quality system elements and management responsibilities. ICH Q10 provides
a harmonized model for a pharmaceutical quality system throughout the lifecycle of a product
and is intended to be used together with regional GMP requirements.
The regional GMPs do not explicitly address all stages of the product lifecycle (e.g.,
development). The quality system elements and management responsibilities described in this
guidance are intended to encourage the use of science- and risk-based approaches at each
lifecycle stage, thereby promoting continual improvement across the entire product lifecycle.
C. Relationship of ICH Q10 to Regulatory Approaches (1.4)
Regulatory approaches for a specific product or manufacturing facility should be commensurate
with the level of product and process understanding, the results of quality risk management, and
the effectiveness of the pharmaceutical quality system. When implemented, the effectiveness of
the pharmaceutical quality system can normally be evaluated during a regulatory inspection at
the manufacturing site. Potential opportunities to enhance science- and risk-based regulatory
approaches are identified in Annex 1. Regulatory processes will be determined by region.
D. ICH Q10 Objectives (1.5)
Implementation of the Q10 model should result in achievement of three main objectives that
complement or enhance regional GMP requirements.
1. Achieve Product Realization (1.5.1)
To establish, implement, and maintain a system that allows the delivery of products with the
quality attributes appropriate to meet the needs of patients, health care professionals, regulatory
authorities (including compliance with approved regulatory filings) and other internal and
external customers.
2 Establish and Maintain a State of Control (1.5.2)
3
To develop and use effective monitoring and control systems for process performance and
product quality, thereby providing assurance of continued suitability and capability of processes.
Quality risk management can be useful in identifying the monitoring and control systems.
3 Facilitate Continual Improvement (1.5.3)
To identify and implement appropriate product quality improvements, process improvements,
variability reduction, innovations, and pharmaceutical quality system enhancements, thereby
increasing the ability to fulfill a pharmaceutical manufacturer’s own quality needs consistently.
Quality risk management can be useful for identifying and prioritizing areas for continual
improvement.
E. Enablers: Knowledge Management and Quality Risk Management (1.6)
Use of knowledge management and quality risk management will enable a company to
implement ICH Q10 effectively and successfully. These enablers will facilitate achievement of
the objectives described in section II.D (1.5) above by providing the means for science- and risk-
based decisions related to product quality.
1. Knowledge Management (1.6.1)
Product and process knowledge should be managed from development through the commercial
life of the product up to and including product discontinuation. For example, development
activities using scientific approaches provide knowledge for product and process understanding.
Knowledge management is a systematic approach to acquiring, analyzing, storing, and
disseminating information related to products, manufacturing processes, and components.
Sources of knowledge include, but are not limited to, prior knowledge (public domain or
internally documented); pharmaceutical development studies; technology transfer activities;
process validation studies over the product lifecycle; manufacturing experience; innovation;
continual improvement; and change management activities.
2. Quality Risk Management (1.6.2)
Quality risk management is integral to an effective pharmaceutical quality system. It can
provide a proactive approach to identifying, scientifically evaluating, and controlling potential
risks to quality. It facilitates continual improvement of process performance and product quality
throughout the product lifecycle. ICH Q9 provides principles and examples of tools for quality
risk management that can be applied to different aspects of pharmaceutical quality.
F. Design and Content Considerations (1.7)
(a) The design, organization, and documentation of the pharmaceutical quality system
should be well structured and clear to facilitate common understanding and consistent
application.
(b) The elements of ICH Q10 should be applied in a manner that is appropriate and
proportionate to each of the product lifecycle stages, recognizing the different goals
4
and knowledge available for each stage.
(c) The size and complexity of the company’s activities should be taken into consideration
when developing a new pharmaceutical quality system or modifying an existing one.
The design of the pharmaceutical quality system should incorporate appropriate risk
management principles. While some aspects of the pharmaceutical quality system can
be company wide and others site specific, the effectiveness of the pharmaceutical
quality system is normally demonstrated at the site level.
(d) The pharmaceutical quality system should include appropriate processes, resources,
and responsibilities to provide assurance of the quality of outsourced activities and
purchased materials as described in section III.G (2.7).
(e) Management responsibilities, as described in section III (2), should be identified
within the pharmaceutical quality system.
(f) The pharmaceutical quality system should include the following elements, as
described in section IV (3): process performance and product quality monitoring,
corrective and preventive action, change management, and management review.
(g) Performance indicators, as described in section V (4), should be identified and used to
monitor the effectiveness of processes within the pharmaceutical quality system.
G. Quality Manual (1.8)
A Quality Manual or equivalent documentation approach should be established and should
contain the description of the pharmaceutical quality system. The description should include:
(a) The quality policy (see section III (2)).
(b) The scope of the pharmaceutical quality system.
(c) Identification of the pharmaceutical quality system processes, as well as their
sequences, linkages, and interdependencies. Process maps and flow charts can be
useful tools to facilitate depicting pharmaceutical quality system processes in a visual
manner.
(d) Management responsibilities within the pharmaceutical quality system (see
section III (2)).
III. MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY (2)
Leadership is essential to establish and maintain a company-wide commitment to quality and for
the performance of the pharmaceutical quality system.
A. Management Commitment (2.1)
(a) Senior management has the ultimate responsibility to ensure an effective
pharmaceutical quality system is in place to achieve the quality objectives, and that
5
roles, responsibilities, and authorities are defined, communicated, and implemented
throughout the company.
(b) Management should:
(1) Participate in the design, implementation, monitoring, and maintenance of an
effective pharmaceutical quality system.
(2) Demonstrate strong and visible support for the pharmaceutical quality system
and ensure its implementation throughout their organization.
(3) Ensure a timely and effective communication and escalation process exists to
raise quality issues to the appropriate levels of management.
(4) Define individual and collective roles, responsibilities, authorities, and inter-
relationships of all organizational units related to the pharmaceutical quality
system. Ensure these interactions are communicated and understood at all
levels of the organization. An independent quality unit/structure with authority
to fulfill certain pharmaceutical quality system responsibilities is required by
regional regulations.
(5) Conduct management reviews of process performance and product quality and
of the pharmaceutical quality system.
(6) Advocate continual improvement.
(7) Commit appropriate resources.
B. Quality Policy (2.2)
(a) Senior management should establish a quality policy that describes the overall
intentions and direction of the company related to quality.
(b) The quality policy should include an expectation to comply with applicable regulatory
requirements and should facilitate continual improvement of the pharmaceutical
quality system.
(c) The quality policy should be communicated to and understood by personnel at all
levels in the company.
(d) The quality policy should be reviewed periodically for continuing effectiveness.
C. Quality Planning (2.3)
(a) Senior management should ensure the quality objectives to implement the quality
policy are defined and communicated.
(b) Quality objectives should be supported by all relevant levels of the company.
(c) Quality objectives should align with the company’s strategies and be consistent with
the quality policy.
(d) Management should provide the appropriate resources and training to achieve the
6
quality objectives.
(e) Performance indicators that measure progress against quality objectives should be
established, monitored, communicated regularly, and acted upon as appropriate as
described in section V.A (4.1) of this document.
D. Resource Management (2.4)
(a) Management should determine and provide adequate and appropriate resources
(human, financial, materials, facilities, and equipment) to implement and maintain the
pharmaceutical quality system and continually improve its effectiveness.
(b) Management should ensure that resources are appropriately applied to a specific
product, process, or site.
E. Internal Communication (2.5)
(a) Management should ensure appropriate communication processes are established and
implemented within the organization.
(b) Communications processes should ensure the flow of appropriate information between
all levels of the company.
(c) Communication processes should ensure the appropriate and timely escalation of
certain product quality and pharmaceutical quality system issues.
F. Management Review (2.6)
(a) Senior management should be responsible for pharmaceutical quality system
governance through management review to ensure its continuing suitability and
effectiveness.
(b) Management should assess the conclusions of periodic reviews of process
performance and product quality and of the pharmaceutical quality system, as
described in sections IV (3) and V (4).
G. Management of Outsourced Activities and Purchased Materials (2.7)
The pharmaceutical quality system, including the management responsibilities described in this
section, extends to the control and review of any outsourced activities and quality of purchased
materials. The pharmaceutical company is ultimately responsible to ensure processes are in place
to assure the control of outsourced activities and quality of purchased materials. These processes
should incorporate quality risk management and include:
(a) Assessing prior to outsourcing operations or selecting material suppliers, the suitability
and competence of the other party to carry out the activity or provide the material
7
using a defined supply chain (e.g., audits, material evaluations, qualification).
(b) Defining the responsibilities and communication processes for quality-related
activities of the involved parties. For outsourced activities, this should be included in a
written agreement between the contract giver and contract acceptor.
(c) Monitoring and review of the performance of the contract acceptor or the quality of
the material from the provider, and the identification and implementation of any
essential improvements.
(d) Monitoring incoming ingredients and materials to ensure they are from approved
sources using the agreed supply chain.
H. Management of Change in Product Ownership (2.8)
When product ownership changes (e.g., through acquisitions), management should consider the
complexity of this and ensure:
(a) The ongoing responsibilities are defined for each company involved
(b) The essential information is transferred
IV. CONTINUAL IMPROVEMENT OF PROCESS PERFORMANCE AND
PRODUCT QUALITY (3)
This section describes the lifecycle stage goals and the four specific pharmaceutical quality
system elements that augment regional requirements to achieve the ICH Q10 objectives, as
defined in section II.D (1.5). It does not restate all regional GMP requirements.
A. Lifecycle Stage Goals (3.1)
The goals of each product lifecycle stage are described below.
1. Pharmaceutical Development (3.1.1)
The goal of pharmaceutical development activities is to design a product and its manufacturing
process to consistently deliver the intended performance and meet the needs of patients and
healthcare professionals, and regulatory authorities and internal customers’ requirements.
Approaches to pharmaceutical development are described in ICH Q8. The results of exploratory
and clinical development studies, while outside the scope of this guidance, are inputs to
pharmaceutical development.
2. Technology Transfer (3.1.2)
The goal of technology transfer activities is to transfer product and process knowledge between
development and manufacturing, and within or between manufacturing sites to achieve product
8
realization. This knowledge forms the basis for the manufacturing process, control strategy,
process validation approach, and ongoing continual improvement.
3. Commercial Manufacturing (3.1.3)
The goals of manufacturing activities include achieving product realization, establishing and
maintaining a state of control, and facilitating continual improvement. The pharmaceutical
quality system should assure that the desired product quality is routinely met, suitable process
performance is achieved, the set of controls are appropriate, improvement opportunities are
identified and evaluated, and the body of knowledge is continually expanded.
4. Product Discontinuation (3.1.4)
The goal of product discontinuation activities is to manage the terminal stage of the product
lifecycle effectively. For product discontinuation, a predefined approach should be used to
manage activities such as retention of documentation and samples and continued product
assessment (e.g., complaint handling and stability) and reporting in accordance with regulatory
requirements.
B. Pharmaceutical Quality System Elements (3.2)
The elements described below might be required in part under regional GMP regulations.
However, the Q10 model’s intent is to enhance these elements to promote the lifecycle approach
to product quality. These four elements are:
• Process performance and product quality monitoring system
• Corrective action and preventive action (CAPA) system
• Change management system
• Management review of process performance and product quality
These elements should be applied in a manner that is appropriate and proportionate to each of the
product lifecycle stages, recognizing the differences among the stages and the different goals of
each stage. Throughout the product lifecycle, companies are encouraged to evaluate
opportunities for innovative approaches to improve product quality.
Each element is followed by a table of example applications of the element to the stages of the
pharmaceutical lifecycle.
1. Process Performance and Product Quality Monitoring System 3.2.1
Pharmaceutical companies should plan and execute a system for the monitoring of process
performance and product quality to ensure a state of control is maintained. An effective
monitoring system provides assurance of the continued capability of processes and controls to
produce a product of desired quality and to identify areas for continual improvement. The
process performance and product quality monitoring system should:
9
(a) Use quality risk management to establish the control strategy. This can include
parameters and attributes related to drug substance and drug product materials and
components, facility and equipment operating conditions, in-process controls, finished
product specifications, and the associated methods and frequency of monitoring and
control. The control strategy should facilitate timely feedback/feedforward and
appropriate corrective action and preventive action.
(b) Provide the tools for measurement and analysis of parameters and attributes identified
in the control strategy (e.g., data management and statistical tools).
(c) Analyze parameters and attributes identified in the control strategy to verify continued
operation within a state of control.
(d) Identify sources of variation affecting process performance and product quality for
potential continual improvement activities to reduce or control variation.
(e) Include feedback on product quality from both internal and external sources (e.g.,
complaints, product rejections, nonconformances, recalls, deviations, audits and
regulatory inspections, and findings).
(f) Provide knowledge to enhance process understanding, enrich the design space (where
established), and enable innovative approaches to process validation.
Table I: Application of Process Performance and Product Quality Monitoring System
Throughout the Product Lifecycle
Pharmaceutical
Development
Technology
Transfer
Commercial
Manufacturing
Process and product knowledge generated and process and product monitoring conducted throughout development can be used to establish a control strategy for manufacturing. Monitoring during scale-up activities can provide a preliminary indication of process performance and the successful integration into manufacturing. Knowledge obtained during transfer and
scale-up activities can
be useful in further
developing the control
strategy.
A well-defined system for process performance and product quality monitoring should be applied to assure performance within a state of control and to identify improvement
areas.
Product
Discontinuation
Once manufacturing
ceases, monitoring
such as stability testing
should continue to
completion of the
studies. Appropriate
action on marketed
product should
continue to be executed
according to regional
regulations.
2. Corrective Action and Preventive Action (CAPA) System (3.2.2)
The pharmaceutical company should have a system for implementing corrective actions and
preventive actions resulting from the investigation of complaints, product rejections,
nonconformances, recalls, deviations, audits, regulatory inspections and findings, and trends
from process performance and product quality monitoring. A structured approach to the
10
investigation process should be used with the objective of determining the root cause. The level
of effort, formality, and documentation of the investigation should be commensurate with the
level of risk, in line with ICH Q9. CAPA methodology should result in product and process
improvements and enhanced product and process understanding.
Table II: Application of Corrective Action and Preventive Action System Throughout the
Product Lifecycle
Pharmaceutical
Development
Technology
Transfer
Commercial
Manufacturing
Product or process
variability is explored.
CAPA methodology is
useful where corrective
actions and preventive
actions are incorporated
into the iterative design
and development
process.
CAPA can be used as
an effective system for
feedback, feedforward,
and continual
improvement.
CAPA should be used,
and the effectiveness of
the actions should be
evaluated.
Product
Discontinuation
CAPA should continue
after the product is
discontinued. The
impact on product
remaining on the
market should be
considered, as well as
other products that
might be affected.
3. Change Management System (3.2.3)
Innovation, continual improvement, the outputs of process performance and product quality
monitoring, and CAPA drive change. To evaluate, approve, and implement these changes
properly, a company should have an effective change management system. There is generally a
difference in formality of change management processes prior to the initial regulatory
submission and after submission, where changes to the regulatory filing might be required under
regional requirements.
The change management system ensures continual improvement is undertaken in a timely and
effective manner. It should provide a high degree of assurance there are no unintended
consequences of the change.
The change management system should include the following, as appropriate for the stage of the
lifecycle:
(a) Quality risk management should be utilized to evaluate proposed changes. The level of
effort and formality of the evaluation should be commensurate with the level of risk.
(b) Proposed changes should be evaluated relative to the marketing authorization,
including design space, where established, and/or current product and process
understanding. There should be an assessment to determine whether a change to the
regulatory filing is required under regional requirements. As stated in ICH Q8,
working within the design space is not considered a change (from a regulatory filing
perspective). However, from a pharmaceutical quality system standpoint, all changes
should be evaluated by a company’s change management system.
(c) Proposed changes should be evaluated by expert teams contributing the appropriate
11
Pharmaceutical
Development
expertise and knowledge from relevant areas (e.g., Pharmaceutical Development,
Manufacturing, Quality, Regulatory Affairs, and Medical) to ensure the change is
technically justified. Prospective evaluation criteria for a proposed change should be
set.
(d) After implementation, an evaluation of the change should be undertaken to confirm the
change objectives were achieved and that there was no deleterious impact on product
quality.
Table III: Application of Change Management System Throughout the Product Lifecycle
Product
Discontinuation
Any changes after
product discontinuation
should go through an
appropriate change
management system.
Technology
Transfer
Commercial
Manufacturing
Change is an inherent
part of the development
process and should be
documented; the
formality of the change
management process
should be consistent
with the stage of
pharmaceutical
development.
The change
management system
should provide
management and
documentation of
adjustments made to
the process during
technology transfer
activities.
A formal change
management system
should be in place for
commercial
manufacturing.
Oversight by the
quality unit should
provide assurance of
appropriate science-
and risk-based
assessments.
4. Management Review of Process Performance and Product Quality (3.2.4)
Management review should provide assurance that process performance and product quality are
managed over the lifecycle. Depending on the size and complexity of the company, management
review can be a series of reviews at various levels of management and should include a timely
and effective communication and escalation process to raise appropriate quality issues to senior
levels of management for review.
(a) The management review system should include:
(1) The results of regulatory inspections and findings, audits and other
assessments, and commitments made to regulatory authorities
(2) Periodic quality reviews, that can include:
(i) Measures of customer satisfaction such as product quality complaints
and recalls
(ii) (iii) Conclusions of process performance and product quality monitoring
The effectiveness of process and product changes including those
arising from corrective action and preventive actions
(3) Any follow-up actions from previous management reviews
(b) The management review system should identify appropriate actions, such as:
(1) Improvements to manufacturing processes and products
(2) Provision, training, and/or realignment of resources
12
(3) Capture and dissemination of knowledge
Table IV: Application of Management Review of Process Performance and Product
Quality Throughout the Product Lifecycle
Pharmaceutical
Development
Technology
Transfer
Commercial
Manufacturing
Product
Discontinuation
Aspects of management
review can be
performed to ensure
adequacy of the product
and process design.
Aspects of
management review
should be performed to
ensure the developed
product and process
can be manufactured at
commercial scale.
Management review
should be a structured
system, as described
above, and should
support continual
improvement.
Management review
should include such
items as product
stability and product
quality complaints.
V. CONTINUAL IMPROVEMENT OF THE PHARMACEUTICAL QUALITY
SYSTEM (4)
This section describes activities that should be conducted to manage and continually improve the
pharmaceutical quality system.
A. Management Review of the Pharmaceutical Quality System (4.1)
Management should have a formal process for reviewing the pharmaceutical quality system on a
periodic basis. The review should include:
(a) Measurement of achievement of pharmaceutical quality system objectives
(b) Assessment of performance indicators that can be used to monitor the effectiveness of
processes within the pharmaceutical quality system, such as:
(1) Complaint, deviation, CAPA and change management processes
(2) Feedback on outsourced activities
(3) Self-assessment processes including risk assessments, trending, and audits
(4) External assessments such as regulatory inspections and findings and customer
audits
B. Monitoring of Internal and External Factors That Can Have an Impacton
the Pharmaceutical Quality System (4.2)
Factors monitored by management can include:
(a) Emerging regulations, guidance, and quality issues that can have an impact on the
Pharmaceutical Quality System
(b) Innovations that might enhance the pharmaceutical quality system
(c) Changes in business environment and objectives
13
(d) Changes in product ownership
C. Outcomes of Management Review and Monitoring (4.3)
The outcome of management review of the pharmaceutical quality system and monitoring of
internal and external factors can include:
(a) Improvements to the pharmaceutical quality system and related processes
(b) Allocation or reallocation of resources and/or personnel training
(c) Revisions to quality policy and quality objectives
(d) Documentation and timely and effective communication of the results of the
management review and actions, including escalation of appropriate issues to senior
management
14
VI. GLOSSARY (5)
ICH and ISO definitions are used in ICH Q10 where they exist. For the purpose of ICH Q10,
where the words “requirement”, “requirements,” or “necessary” appear in an ISO definition, they
do not necessarily reflect a regulatory requirement. The source of the definition is identified in
parentheses after the definition. Where no appropriate ICH or ISO definition was available, an
ICH Q10 definition was developed.
Capability of a Process: Ability of a process to realize a product that will fulfill the
requirements of that product. The concept of process capability can also be defined in statistical
terms. (ISO 9000:2005)
Change Management: A systematic approach to proposing, evaluating, approving,
implementing, and reviewing changes. (ICH Q10)
Continual Improvement: Recurring activity to increase the ability to fulfill requirements. (ISO
9000:2005)
Control Strategy: A planned set of controls, derived from current product and process
understanding, that assures process performance and product quality. The controls can include
parameters and attributes related to drug substance and drug product materials and components,
facility and equipment operating conditions, in-process controls, finished product specifications,
and the associated methods and frequency of monitoring and control. (ICH Q10)
Corrective Action: Action to eliminate the cause of a detected nonconformity or other
undesirable situation. NOTE: Corrective action is taken to prevent recurrence whereas preventive
action is taken to prevent occurrence. (ISO 9000:2005)
Design Space: The multidimensional combination and interaction of input variables (e.g.,
material attributes) and process parameters that have been demonstrated to provide assurance of
quality. (ICH Q8)
Enabler: A tool or process that provides the means to achieve an objective. (ICH Q10)
Feedback/Feedforward:
Feedback: The modification or control of a process or system by its results or effects.
Feedforward: The modification or control of a process using its anticipated results or
effects. (Oxford Dictionary of English by Oxford University Press, 2003)
Feedback/feedforward can be applied technically in process control strategies and conceptually
in quality management. (ICH Q10)
Innovation: The introduction of new technologies or methodologies. (ICH Q10)
15
Knowledge Management: Systematic approach to acquiring, analyzing, storing, and
disseminating information related to products, manufacturing processes, and components. (ICH
Q10)
Outsourced Activities: Activities conducted by a contract acceptor under a written agreement
with a contract giver. (ICH Q10)
Performance Indicators: Measurable values used to quantify quality objectives to reflect the
performance of an organization, process, or system, also known as performance metrics in some
regions. (ICH Q10)
Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS): Management system to direct and control a
pharmaceutical company with regard to quality. (ICH Q10 based upon ISO 9000:2005)
Preventive Action: Action to eliminate the cause of a potential nonconformity or other
undesirable potential situation. NOTE: Preventive action is taken to prevent occurrence whereas
corrective action is taken to prevent recurrence. (ISO 9000:2005)
Product Realization: Achievement of a product with the quality attributes appropriate to meet
the needs of patients, health care professionals, and regulatory authorities (including compliance
with marketing authorization) and internal customers requirements. (ICH Q10)
Quality: requirements. (ICH Q9)
The degree to which a set of inherent properties of a product, system, or process fulfils
Quality Manual: Document specifying the quality management system of an organization.
(ISO 9000:2005)
Quality Objectives: A means to translate the quality policy and strategies into measurable
activities. (ICH Q10)
Quality Planning: Part of quality management focused on setting quality objectives and
specifying necessary operational processes and related resources to fulfill the quality objectives.
(ISO 9000:2005)
Quality Policy: Overall intentions and direction of an organization related to quality as formally
expressed by senior management. (ISO 9000:2005)
Quality Risk Management: A systematic process for the assessment, control, communication,
and review of risks to the quality of the drug (medicinal) product across the product lifecycle.
(ICH Q9)
Senior Management: Person(s) who direct and control a company or site at the highest levels
with the authority and responsibility to mobilize resources within the company or site. (ICH Q10
based in part on ISO 9000:2005)
16
State of Control: A condition in which the set of controls consistently provides assurance of
continued process performance and product quality. (ICH Q10)
17
Annex I: Potential Opportunities To Enhance Science- and Risk-Based
Regulatory Approaches *
*Note: This annex reflects potential opportunities to enhance regulatory approaches. The actual
regulatory process will be determined by region.
Scenario Potential Opportunity
1. Comply with GMPs Compliance – status quo
2. Demonstrate effective pharmaceutical quality system, including effective use of quality risk management principles (e.g., ICH Q9 and ICH Q10).
Opportunity to:
• increase use of risk-based
approaches for regulatory
inspections
3. Demonstrate product and process
understanding, including effective
use of quality risk management
principles (e.g., ICH Q8 and ICH
Q9).
Opportunity to:
• facilitate science-based
pharmaceutical quality assessment
• enable innovative approaches to
process validation
• establish real-time release
mechanisms
4. Demonstrate effective
pharmaceutical quality system and
product and process understanding,
including the use of quality risk
management principles (e.g., ICH
Q8, ICH Q9, and ICH Q10).
Opportunity to:
• increase use of risk-based
approaches for regulatory
inspections;
• facilitate science-based
pharmaceutical quality assessment;
• optimize science- and risk-based
postapproval change processes to
maximize benefits from innovation
and continual improvement;
• enable innovative approaches to
process validation;
• establish real-time release
mechanisms.
18
Annex 2
Diagram of the ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System Model
ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System
Pharmaceutical
Development
Technology
Transfer
Commercial
Manufacturing
Product
Discontinuation
Investigational products
GMP
PQS
elements
Enablers
Management Responsibilities
Process Performance & Product Quality Monitoring System
Corrective Action / Preventive Action (CAPA) System
Change Management System
Management Review
Knowledge Management
Quality Risk Management
This diagram illustrates the major features of the ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System
(PQS) model. The PQS covers the entire lifecycle of a product including pharmaceutical
development, technology transfer, commercial manufacturing, and product discontinuation as
illustrated by the upper portion of the diagram. The PQS augments regional GMPs as illustrated
in the diagram. The diagram also illustrates that regional GMPs apply to the manufacture of
investigational products.
The next horizontal bar illustrates the importance of management responsibilities explained in
section III (2) to all stages of the product lifecycle. The following horizontal bar lists the PQS
elements that serve as the major pillars under the PQS model. These elements should be applied
appropriately and proportionally to each lifecycle stage, recognizing opportunities to identify
areas for continual improvement.
The bottom set of horizontal bars illustrates the enablers: knowledge management and quality
risk management, which are applicable throughout the lifecycle stages. These enablers support
the PQS goals of achieving product realization, establishing and maintaining a state of control,
and facilitating continual improvement.
19